arXiv:cond-mat/0103506v1  [cond-mat.soft]  24 Mar 2001Dielectric Behavior of Nonspherical Cell Suspensions
Jun Lei1,2, Jones T. K. Wan1, K. W. Yu1and Hong Sun2,3
1Department of Physics, Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shat in, NT, Hong Kong
2Department of Applied Physics, Shanghai Jiao Tong Universi ty, Shanghai 200 030, China
3Department of Physics, University of California, Berkeley, California 94720-7300, USA
Abstract
Recent experiments revealed that the dielectric dispersio n spectrum of ﬁssion
yeast cells in a suspension was mainly composed of two sub-di spersions. The
low-frequency sub-dispersion depended on the cell length, whereas the high-
frequency one was independent of it. The cell shape eﬀect was q ualitatively
simulated by an ellipsoidal cell model. However, the compar ison between
theory and experiment was far from being satisfactory. In an attempt to close
up the gap between theory and experiment, we considered the m ore realistic
cells of spherocylinders, i.e., circular cylinders with tw o hemispherical caps at
both ends. We have formulated a Green’s function formalism f or calculating
the spectral representation of cells of ﬁnite length. The Gr een’s function can
be reduced because of the azimuthal symmetry of the cell. Thi s simpliﬁcation
enables us to calculate the dispersion spectrum and hence ac cess the eﬀect of
cell structure on the dielectric behavior of cell suspensio ns.
PACS Numbers: 82.70.-y, 87.22.Bt, 77.22.Gm, 77.84.Nh
Typeset using REVT EX
1
I. INTRODUCTION
Dielectric spectroscopy has become a quantitative method of real- time monitoring of cell
growth in suspensions [1–3]. The real-time monitoring has advantage s over conventional
techniques and would be important to investigate the dynamic behav ior of cell growth.
There are many factors that may inﬂuence the dielectric behavior o f biological materials:
structure, orientation of dipoles, surface conductances, memb rane transport processes, etc.
All these factors inﬂuence one another and it is diﬃcult to separate out the eﬀect of a single
one. However, some eﬀects can be dominant at certain ranges of f requencies. For instance,
the dielectric dispersion spectrum of living cell suspensions in radiofr equencies is mainly
determined by the cell shape. The objective of this work is to develo p a theory for such
correlation, on which new applications in biotechnology rely.
More recently, Asami [4] reported that the dielectric dispersion sp ectrum of ﬁssion yeast
cells in a suspension was mainly composed of two sub-dispersions. The experimental data
revealed that the low-frequency sub-dispersion depended on the cell length, while the high-
frequency one was independent of it. Asami adopted a shell-ellipsoid model [3], in which an
ellipsoid is covered with an insulating shell as the electrical model of no nspherical biological
cells. The comparison between model calculation [3] and experimenta l data [4] was far from
being satisfactory. Asami suggested that the discrepancy is att ributed to the rod-like cell
shape. However, the depolarization factor needed in his theory is d iﬃcult to calculate for
cells of rod-like shape because of lack of available theories.
In this work, we propose the use of the spectral representation [5] for analyzing the cell
models. The spectral representation is a rigorous mathematical f ormalism of the eﬀective
dielectric constant of a two-phase composite material [5]. It oﬀers the advantage of the
separationofmaterialparameters(namelythedielectric constan tandconductivity) fromthe
cell structure information, thus simplifying the study. From the sp ectral representation, one
can readily derive the dielectric dispersion spectrum, with the disper sion strength as well as
the characteristic frequency being explicitly expressed in terms of the structure parameters
2
and the materials parameters of the cell suspension (see section I II below). The actual
shape of the real and imaginary parts of the permittivity over the r elaxation region can be
uniquely determined by the Debye relaxation spectrum, parametriz ed by the characteristic
frequencies and the dispersion strengths. So, we can study the im pact of these parameters
on the dispersion spectrum directly.
II. FORMALISM
A. Spectral representation theory
We consider a two-component composite dielectric with complex dielec tric constant ǫ(r)
equal to ǫ2=ε2+σ2/j2πfin the host medium and ǫ1=ε1+σ1/j2πfin the embedding
medium. AninterfaceΣseparatesthetwomedia. Inauniformapplied electric ﬁeld E=E0ˆz
(for convenience, let E0=−1), the electrostatic potential satisﬁes the Laplace’s equation:
∇·[(1−1
sη(r))∇Φ(r)] = 0, (1)
wheres=ǫ2/(ǫ2−ǫ1) denotes the relevant material parameter and η(r) is the characteristic
function of the composite, having value 1 for rin the embedding medium and 0 otherwise.
The electric potential Φ( r) can be solved formally as:
Φ(r) = Φ0(r)+1
s/integraldisplay
dr′η(r′)∇′G0(r−r′)·∇′Φ(r′) (2)
whereG0(r−r′) = 1/4π|r−r′|is the free space Green’s function, and Φ 0(r) =r·ˆz=z
is the potential of the unperturbed uniform ﬁeld E. It is instructive to convert the volume
integration into the surface integration via the Green’s second iden tity and only deal with
the potential on the interface Σ [6]. We denote an integral-diﬀerent ial operator Γ:
ΓΦ(r) =/contintegraldisplay′
ΣdS′·∇′G0(r−r′)Φ(r′)+1
2Φ(r),r∈Σ, (3)
toavoidthesingularityof G0(r−r′)whentheintegrationvariable r′approachesthepointof r
[6]. The integration with a “prime” denotes the restricted integratio n which excludes r′=r.
3
Let Ψn(r) andsnbe thenth eigenfunction and eigenvalue of the Γ operator respectively. We
can expand Φ 0(r) and Φ(r) on the interface Σ in a series expansion of eigenfunction Ψ n(r):
Φ0(r) =/summationdisplay
nznΨn(r), (4)
Φ(r) =/summationdisplay
nszn
s−snΨn(r), (5)
whereznare the expansion coeﬃcients. Then we can write the eﬀective dielec tric constant
¯ǫin the Bergman-Milton representation [5]:
¯ǫ=−1
V/integraldisplay
dVǫ(r)Ez (6)
=1
V/integraldisplay
dVǫ2[1−1
sη(r)]∂Φ
∂z(7)
=ǫ2/bracketleftBigg
1−1
V/summationdisplay
nzn
s−sn/contintegraldisplay
ΣdS·ˆzΦn(r)/bracketrightBigg
(8)
=ǫ2/bracketleftBigg
1−p/summationdisplay
nfn
s−sn/bracketrightBigg
, (9)
wherepis the volume fraction of the suspending cells. Note that Ezis a dimensionless
electric ﬁeld because E0=−1. The eigenvalue snand the spectral function fncan be
proved to be real and satisfy simple properties that 0 < sn<1,fn>0 and/summationtextfn= 1. We
shall show that both the spectral function fnand the eigenvalue sndetermine the dielectric
behavior of cell suspensions.
B. Cells with an axis of revolution
Now the principal problem is to calculate the eigenvalue snand the spectral function fn.
For many cells interacting with one another, it is a formidable task. Ho wever, in the limit
of a dilute cell suspension and weak applied ﬁeld, one can regard the c ells in suspension
as being noninteracting and randomly oriented and the problem is red uced to that of a
single cell. We will consider cells with an axis of revolution, namely, the sp heroidal and the
spherocylinder cells [7] to mimic cells of rod-like shape. The prolate sph eroid is generated
by rotating an ellipse around its major axis, while the spherocylinder is obtained by ﬁtting
4
two hemispherical caps at both ends of a circular cylinder. For a pro late spheroid, the
eigenvalues and eigenfunctions can be calculated exactly. The only n onzerofnequals unity
forEbeing along the major or minor axis of the prolate spheroid, and the c orresponding
eigenvalues are given by:
sz=−1
q2−1+qln[q+(q2−1)1/2]
(q2−1)3/2, (10)
sx= (1−sz)/2. (11)
whereqis the length to diameter ratio; zandxrefer to the direction along the major and
minor axis respectively. For a spherocylinder, the consideration of the symmetry properties
of the cell will help us choose the appropriate orthogonal basis for calculating the matrix
elements of the Γ operator. Because of the rotation symmetry ab out the major axis of the
spherocylinder, the eigenfunction is necessarily of the form ( ancosnθ+bnsinnθ)f(x) with
nbeing an integer. Due to the inversion symmetry of the cell, f(x) must be either odd or
even functions. It is convenient to expand f(x) in a series of Legendre polynomials Pm(x/l),
where 2listhelengthofthecell. The applieduniformﬁeld Ecanalways beresolved into two
components along the major and minor axes of the spherocylinder, so we can calculate the
snandfnforEalong the major and minor axes separately. By symmetry, in order t o obtain
a nonzero fn, the eigenfunction should be the form of/summationtextAmP2m+1(x/l) forEbeing along
the major axis, while it reads cos θ/summationtextBmP2m(x/l) forEbeing along the minor axis, with
m= 0,1,2,···. Using this orthogonal basis, we can calculate a truncated matrix a ccording
to the precision needed. We should remark that the matrix is genera lly nonsymmetric.
III. DIELECTRIC DISPERSION SPECTRUM
We show here that from the spectral representation, one can re adily derive the dielectric
dispersion spectrum. Substituting ǫ1=ε1+σ1/j2πfandǫ2=ε2+σ2/j2πf(εandσbeing
the real and imaginary parts of the complex dielectric constant) int o Eq.(9), deﬁning a new
parameter t=σ2/(σ2−σ1) and re-deﬁning s=ε2/(ε2−ε1), we rewrite theeﬀective dielectric
constant ǫafter simple manipulations:
5
ǫ=ǫH+/summationdisplay
n∆ǫn
1+jf/fcn+σL
j2πf, (12)
whereǫHandσLare the high-frequency dielectric constant and the low-frequenc y con-
ductivity respectively, while ∆ ǫnare the dispersion magnitudes, fc
nare the characteristic
frequencies of the nth sub-dispersion.
We have already shown that there are only two poles in the spectral representation of
the prolate spheroids. In what follows, we will show that there are t wo dominant poles in
the spectral representation of the spherocylinder and hence th ere are two sub-dispersions in
the dielectric dispersion spectrum. The dispersion magnitudes and d ispersion frequencies
are given by:
∆ǫ1=1
3pε2s1(s−t)2
s(s−s1)(t−s1)2, (13)
∆ǫ2=2
3pε2s2(t−s)2
s(s−s2)(t−s2)2, (14)
fc
1=σ2s(t−s1)
2πε2t(s−s1), (15)
fc
2=σ2s(t−s2)
2πε2t(s−s2). (16)
Thus, we are able to obtain the dispersion strengths as well as the c haracteristic frequencies
explicitly in terms of the structure parameters and the materials pa rameters of the cell
suspension.
The dielectric dispersion spectrum of a dilute suspension of prolate s pheroids is mainly
composed of two sub-dispersions, namely, szis responsible for the lower frequency one and
sxfor the higher one. For a spherocylinder, we obtain a nonvanishing s eries offnandsn.
Along the major axis, f1is dominant for all qand we can omit the smaller ones. This
dominant f1is plotted in Fig.1 against q, and the corresponding szare plotted in Fig.2,
together with the exact result of a prolate spheroid. As is evident in Fig.1, we can see that
the diﬀerence between the two models is indeed small. Along the minor a xis, the solution
becomes more complicated. The dominant f2nearq= 1 decreases quickly as qincreases;
anotherf3increases and takes over at large q. These two fnare also plotted in Fig.1 and
6
their corresponding eigenvalues are plotted in Fig.3. As shown in Fig.3, the two eigenvalues
tend to that of a prolate spheroid in the limit of both small and large q.
Nearq= 2, the two fnhave comparable values, resulting in two sub-dispersions at higher
frequency. These sub-dispersions can interfere with each other , rendering it diﬃcult to ﬁnd
the characteristic frequencies of the diﬀerent sub-dispersions. Physically, the local ﬁeld is
the most nonuniform in this case. Nevertheless, we will consider cells of large length and
omit this complication.
With Eqs.(13)–(16), it is easy to calculate the eﬀect of the rod-like c ell structure on the
dispersion spectrum and to compare with experiment data. We will sh ow that the sphero-
cylinder model does give some improvement towards the experiment al result. However, the
improvement is too small to close up the gap as Asami expected. In f act, we shall see that
Asami omitted the material parameters which will play an important r ole in the experimen-
tal condition. By introducing the conductivity contrast t=σ2/(σ2−σ1), we found that a
small negative t, i.e.σ1≫σ2, should be used to close up the discrepancy.
We estimate tandsby ﬁtting Eqs.(13)–(16) to the experimental ratio of ∆ ǫ1/∆ǫ2and
fc
2/fc
1, and we get t=−0.0014 and s= 5.0. It means that σ1≈700σ2andε1≈0.80ε2.
The enhanced conductivity of cell cytoplasm is attributed to the me mbrane potential. The
result is in contrast to the previous (unjustiﬁed) claim that σ1≈σ2.
Table I lists the ∆ ǫ1/∆ǫ2ratio and fc
2/fc
1ratio for both experimental and theoretical
results. Using the ﬁtting material parameters, the improvement is obvious for both the
prolate spheroid model and the spherocylinder model, while the diﬀer ence between the two
models is quite small.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
In this work, we have applied the spectral representation to the d ielectric dispersion of
suspensions of ﬁssion yeast cells. As mentioned by Asami [4], the disc repancies between
theory and experiment may be attributed to the rod-like cell shape . For cells of noncon-
7
ventional shape, however, there exists no available cell model in th e literature and we must
develop the spectral representation from ﬁrst principles.
More precisely, we have developed a Green’s function formalism [6,8] f or calculating
the spectral representation of rods of ﬁnite length. We modelled t he rod-like cells as the
spherocylinders, i.e., circular cylinders with two hemispherical caps a t both ends. We solved
the spectral representation of the eﬀective dielectric constant from ﬁrst principles. Similar
formalism was adopted for cell suspensions near their sub-division p oint [9–11].
Generallyspeaking, whentheaxialratio qislargerthan4, theprolatespheroidmodelcan
be employed as a good approximation for rod-like cell structures. F orq <4, the dielectric
behavior will become more sensitive to the cell structure of the sus pending particles, and
there are more sub-dispersions than that of the prolate spheroid suspensions.
Our model does not include the rotational or vibrational eﬀects, a nd our results are
expected to be valid only for weak electric ﬁelds. Our model also ignor es the multi-shell
nature of the cells. Usually the multi-shell model is used to explain the high-frequency
steps of spherical cell suspensions. Similar conclusions were found in one of our previous
paper on multi-shell dielectric spheres in electrorheological (ER) ﬂu ids [12] to account for
the eﬀects of water coating on the ER eﬀects. In Ref. [12], we also s howed that the spectral
representation can still be used for multi-shell model, albeit with a slig ht modiﬁcation.
In Asami’s experiment, there exist three subdispersions, the highe st frequency step
(above 10MHz) is due to the vacuole and cell wall as mentioned by Asa mi, while the two
lower frequency step is evidently dependent on the cell shape. And the disperson magnitude
of the highest frequency step is much smaller than that of the two lo wer frequency ones.
So one expects that the multi-shell model has only a small eﬀect on t he lower frequency
steps. In fact the multi-shell model was used in Asami’s theory, but the discrepancy, as we
mentioned in the text, is still large.
The large cytoplasmic conductivity is a key result of our investigation . We believe that
the large cytoplasmic conductivity is reasonable because the cells ha ve to maintain a higher
ion concentration in their cytoplasm to avoid the shrinkage of cells du e to a loss of water
8
across the cell membrane. However, to our knowledge, there exis ts no direct experimental
mesurement on the cytoplasmic conductivity. In our work, we prop ose a convenient and
practicalmeansofdetermining thecytoplasmic conductivity fromt hedielectric spectroscopy
data, which analysis can be important for biotechnology.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported in part by the Direct Grant for Research o f the Research
Committee and inpart by theResearch GrantsCouncil ofthe Hong K ongSAR Government.
K.W.Y. acknowledges useful conversation with Professor G. Q. Gu.
9
REFERENCES
[1] For a review, see J. Gimsa and D. Wachner, Biophys. J. 75, 1107 (1998).
[2] E. Davies, A. Woodward and D. Kell, Bioelectromagnetics 21, 23 (2000).
[3] K. Asami, T. Yonezawa, Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1245, 317 (1995).
[4] K. Asami, Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1472, 137 (1999).
[5] D. J. Bergman, Phys. Rep. 43, 379 (1978).
[6] K. W. Yu, Hong Sun and Jones T. K. Wan, Physica B 279, 78 (2000).
[7] P. A. Knipp and T. L. Reinecke, Phys. Rev. B 46, 10310 (1992).
[8] G. Q. Gu and R. B. Tao, Phys. Rev. B 37, 8612 (1988).
[9] E. Gheorghiu, J. Phys. A: Math. Gen. 27, 3883 (1994).
[10] E. Gheorghiu and K. Asami, Bioelectrochem. Bioenergetics 45, 139 (1998).
[11] C. Prodan and E. Prodan, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 32, 335 (1999).
[12] K. W. Yu, Jones T. K. Wan, M. F. Law and K. K. Leung, Int. J. Mo d. Phys. C 9, 1447,
(1998).
10
TABLES
TABLE I. The ratios of the characteristic frequencies ∆ ǫ1/∆ǫ2and the ratios of the dispersion
strengths fc
2/fc
1listed as a function of the length to diameter ratio qof the cells. The exper-
imental results were extracted from Ref.[4] together with t he theoretical predictions. Both the
prolate spheroid model and the spherocylinder model adopt t he same ﬁtting material parameters
determined from the experimental data.
prolate spheroid spherocylinder
experimental result Asami theory model model
q∆ǫ1/∆ǫ2fc
2/fc
1∆ǫ1/∆ǫ2fc
2/fc
1∆ǫ1/∆ǫ2fc
2/fc
1∆ǫ1/∆ǫ2fc
2/fc
1
3.46 2.22 8.95 0.900 3.00 2.26 5.34 2.77 5.89
7.17 8.65 27.4 2.07 7.73 6.10 15.3 6.67 16.4
10.2 16.4 52.6 3.39 13.0 9.94 25.9 10.5 27.2
11
FIGURES
FIG. 1. The three dominant fnplotted against the axial ratio q:f1along the major axis (solid
line),f1along the minor axis (long dashed line) and f2along the minor axis (short dashed line).
FIG. 2. The eigenvalue snassociated with fnalong the major axis plotted against the axial
ratioq: the spherocylinder cell (solid line with ﬁlled circles), a nd the exact result of the prolate
spheroid (solid line).
FIG. 3. The eigenvalue snassociated with fnalong the minor axis plotted against the axial
ratioq:s1of the spherocylinder cell (solid line with ﬁlled squares), s2of the spherocylinder cell
(solid line with ﬁlled circles), and the exact result of the p rolate spheroid (solid line).
12
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
q = Length / Diameter00.20.40.60.81fn
Fig.1/Lei, Wan, Yu, Sun
13
1 3 5 7 9
q = Length / Diameter00.10.20.30.4Sz
Fig.2/Lei, Wan, Yu, Sun
14
1 3 5 7 9
q = Length / Diameter0.30.40.5Sx
Fig.3/Lei, Wan, Yu, Sun
15
