arXiv:cond-mat/0104482v1  25 Apr 2001Catastrophic senescence of the Paciﬁc salmon
without mutation-accumulation
Hildegard Meyer-Ortmanns
Institut f¨ ur Theoretische Physik
Universit¨ at Heidelberg
Philosophenweg 16
D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany
e-mail: ortmanns@thphys.uni-heidelberg.de
April 26, 2024
Abstract
We derive catastrophic senescence of the Paciﬁc salmon from an aging model
which was recently proposed by Stauﬀer. The model is based on the postu-
lates of a minimum reproduction age and a maximal genetic lif espan. It allows
for self-organization of a typical age of ﬁrst reproduction and a typical age of
death. Our Monte Carlo simulations of the population dynami cs show that
the model leads to catastrophic senescence for semelparous reproduction as it
occurs in the case of salmon, but to a more gradually increase of senescence
for iteroparous reproduction.
Keywords : population dynamics, aging, Stauﬀer model, Monte Carlo
1 Introduction
According to the evolutionary theory of aging senescence is ultimately caused by a
declining pressure of natural selection as one gets older an d older [1]. One mani-
festation of senescence (which can be most easily handled on the computer) is an
increase of mortality with age or, more precisely, a decreas e of survivors at age a,
from an initial population of newly born oﬀspring at time 0. S enescence is attributed
to several factors like environment, metabolism, and, most important, by several ge-
netic mechanisms. Two major genetic mechanisms, which are u nder discussion and
need not necessarily exclude each other, are antagonistic p leitropy and mutation-
accumulation. Based on the latter mechanism, i.e. on the hyp othesis of an increase
of deleterious mutations with age, Penna et al. (1995) propo sed a bit-string model
[2] , which nowadays is widely used for Monte Carlo simulatio ns of aging, because
it predicts many experimentally observed features of senes cence (for a recent review
1
see [3]). One of the successful predicitions is the catastro phic senescence for the
Paciﬁc salmon.
Paciﬁc salmon show the most dramatic manifestation of aging . As semelparous
individuals they breed only once in their life, all at the sam e age, with plenty of
oﬀspring, and die a few weeks later . In contrast to salmon, it eroparous individuals
breed repeatedly and age more gradually.
2 The model
Recently Stauﬀer has proposed a model which is based on the po stulate of a mini-
mum reproduction age and a maximal genetic lifespan [4]. Onl y these two numbers
are transmitted from generation to generation, with certai n mutations, by asexual
reproduction. The population consists of Nindividuals i(i∈1, ..., N ) initially. Each
individual is characterized by three integers: its age a(i), its minimum reproduction
ageam(i) and its maximal genetic lifespan ad(i) with 0 ≤am(i)< ad(i)≤32. The
maximal lifetime is restricted to 32 time units (called year s), the minimum repro-
duction age may be chosen between zero and ad(i)−1. Within these constraints the
values of am(i) and ad(i) are randomly mutated for an oﬀspring by ±1, away from
the maternal values, and for each child separately. These mu tations realize some
kind of antagonistic pleiotropy in the sense that a shorter l ifespan or a later repro-
duction age increase the birth rate. (“Parents die to make pl ace for their children”.)
After an individual has reached its minimum reproduction ag e, it gives birth to one
oﬀspring with probability b, chosen as (1 + ǫ)/(ad(i)−am(i) +ǫ) with ǫ= 0.08
for convenience. Independently of the genetic death, which happens automatically
and unavoidably if a(i) =ad(i), at each time interval an individual can also die
“accidentally”, with the Verhulst probalility N/N max.Nmaxis called the carrying
capacity to account for the fact that any given environment c an only support pop-
ulations up to some maximal size Nmax. Otherwise the individuals die because of
food and space limitations. Stauﬀer’s model shows the basic features required for
senescence. The age distribution shows an increase of morta lity with age. Moreover,
a self-organization of a typical age of ﬁrst reproduction an d of death is observed,
similarly to Ito’s self-organization of a minimum reproduc tion age in the framework
of the Penna model [5].
In this paper we apply Stauﬀer’s model to the population dyna mics of Paciﬁc
salmon and check whether the model is able to reproduce the qu alitative features of
catastrophic senescence. For a given value of Nmaxand an initial population of N
individuals we specify am(i) = 1 and ad(i) = 16 for all i= 1, ..., N as initial values.
One Monte Carlo iteration then consists of the following thr ee steps that we call
“deaths”, “births” and “aging”.
•In the ﬁrst loop of “deaths” over all individuals, each indiv idual dies either with
the Verhulst probability N/N max, or, if it survives space and food limitations,
2
because it has reached its maximal genetically allowed age ad(i). Otherwise it
survives. The initial population of size Ngets reduced this way.
•In the second loop of “births” over all individuals, each ind ividual gives birth
tonb≥1 oﬀspring with probability b= 1.08/(ad(i)−am(i) + 0.08), provided
the maternal age is not below the minimum reproduction age an d equals a
ﬁxed given integer a0with 0 ≤am(i)≤a0< a d(i)≤32 and a0(i) =a0is
chosen the same for all individuals. The latter condition ob viously accounts
for the speciﬁc features of salmon which breed only once and a ll at the same
age. It turns out that the choice of the number of oﬀspring nbis not arbitrary,
because the second condition is so restrictive that the popu lation only survives
for suﬃciently large nb. Now the values of amandadfor the oﬀspring are
mutated away from the maternal values, again at each time int erval by ±1
for each child separately as in Stauﬀer’s model, but with pro bability ps<1.
This way the mutations become suppressed with probability 1 −ps, to account
for the experimental fact that the time interval for reprodu ction of salmon is
rather narrow for anygeneration. Unless mutations are suppressed, they have
the tendency of spreading the ﬁrst reproduction age within a broader time
interval. On the histograms of aging this has a similar eﬀect as iteroparous
reproduction. The question is whether the minimum reproduc tion age adjusts
itself to a value which is self-consistent with the prescrib ed ﬁxed reproduction
agea0. The remaining mutations should drive the initial values fo ram(i)
towards a0.
•In the third step of a single iteration, the population which remains from the
ﬁrst two steps ages by one time unit, ( a(i)→a(i) + 1). The population size
and averages over the individual minimum reproduction ages and the maximal
lifespans are stored. From a certain number of iterations on also the individual
agesa(i),am(i) and ad(i) are stored in histograms as a function of the time
interval j,j∈(1, ...,32).
Now the iterations are repeated a number of ttimes until the population dy-
namics has stabilized and the ﬂuctuations in average values are negligibly small.
3 Results
Figs.1 and 2 show various histograms of ages adfor genetic death which were ob-
tained for the following choice of parameters. In Fig.1 the c arrying capacity Nmax
is chosen as 2 ·105,Ninitially as Nmax/2. The number of iterations tis 2·104.
The actual reproduction age a0is ﬁxed to 6, and the number of births nbwhich an
individual can give to oﬀspring at the age of 6 is 12. Mutation s of the minimum
reproduction age of oﬀspring are suppressed by 80%(+), 95%( x) and 99%( ⋆), re-
spectively. The histograms show a clear self-organized max imum of genetic death
at an age of 7. In discrete time units this means that death occ urs most likely
3
directly after reproduction. The peaks are the sharper the s tronger the suppres-
sion of mutations. The qualitative shape of the histograms s tays the same when
Nmaxis varied over several orders of magnitude. Already after ≈100 iterations
the population dynamics stabilizes in the sense that the pop ulation size oscillates
regularly between stable minimum and maximum values. These regular oscillations
build up randomly during the ﬁrst 100 iterations and then are reproduced with the
period a0= 6. The value of nb= 12 is the minimal integer so that the population
with 95% suppression of mutations survives as a whole. For sm allernbit dies out
after a few iterations. This feature is in qualitative agree ment with nature. Paciﬁc
salmon produce plenty oﬀspring once they breed to compensat e for the restrictive
conditions on amanda0independent of i. The maximum of the histogram of ages
for the minimal reproduction age lies at an age of 6, consiste nt with the prescribed
value a0.
In Fig.2 we compare histograms of ages for genetic death betw een iteroparous
(full line) and semelparous (dashed line) reproduction. Th e dashed curve was ob-
tained for Nmax= 2·105,t= 2·104,a0= 6,nb= 12, 1 −ps= 99%. Again it
shows a sharp peak at the age of 7. The histogram for iteroparo us reproduction was
obtained for Nmax= 2·107,t= 2·104, reproduction can happen at any age between
am(i) and ad(i), (i.e. i-dependent and possibly several times in one life) ,nb= 1
and no suppression of mutations of am(i) and ad(i) for the oﬀspring. The hundred
times larger value for Nmaxwas chosen for convenience to get comparable numbers
foradin spite of the diﬀerent reproduction conditions. The maxim a of both curves
are self-organized, but in the iteroparous case the maximum is much broader, going
along with a gradual increase of senescence with time or a les s rapid aging than in
the case of salmon, compatible with the Penna model [2].
4 Summary
Stauﬀer’s model based on the two postulates of a minimum repr oduction age and a
maximal genetic lifespan predicts the catastrophic senesc ence for the Paciﬁc salmon
in a qualitative way. The larger the suppression of mutation s, the faster die the
individuals after reproduction, and the larger is the numbe r of births in one repro-
duction step which is necessary to sustain the species. The s elf-organized maximum
of the histogram of ages amis self-consistent with the only allowed age a0for repro-
duction, a restriction that is used as an input. Stauﬀer’s ex planation works without
mutation-accumulation, whereas mutation-accumulation w as an essential ingredient
in the Penna model. Therefore, diﬀerently from what the succ ess of the Penna
model might have suggested, mutation-accumulation does no t seem to be essential
for explaining gross qualitative features of senescence.
4
5 Acknowlegdment
I would like to thank Dietrich Stauﬀer for stimulating discu ssions.
References
[1] M. R. Rose, Evolutionary Biology of Aging (Oxford Univer sity Press, New York,
1991).
[2] T. J. P. Penna, S. Moss de Oliveira and D. Stauﬀer, Phys. Re v. E 52, R3309
(1995).
[3] S. Moss de Oliveira, P. M. C. de Oliveira and D. Stauﬀer, Ev olution, Money,
War and Computers (Teubner, Stuttgart-Leipzig 1999).
[4] D. Stauﬀer, in Biological Evolution and Statistical Phy sics (Dresden, May 2000),
M. L¨ assig and A. Valleriani (Springer, Berlin 2001 or 2002) .
[5] N. Ito, Int. J. Mod. Phys. C 7, 107 (1996).
5
1101001000100001000001e+061e+071e+081e+09
0 5 10 15 20number
age
Figure 1: Histogram of ages for genetic death; mutation prob ability 20(+), 5(x) and
1(⋆) percent
6
05e+071e+081.5e+082e+082.5e+083e+083.5e+084e+08
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35number 
age
Figure 2: Histogram of ages for genetic death: iteroparous ( full) and semelparous
(dashed) reproduction
7
