arXiv:cond-mat/0104065v2  [cond-mat.soft]  31 Oct 2001Mechanisms of cooperativity underlying sequence-indepen dent
β-sheet formation
Chinlin Guo, Margaret S. Cheung, Herbert Levine
Department of Physics, University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093-0319
David A. Kessler
Department of Physics, Bar-Ilan University, Ramat-Gan, Isra el
(Dated: October 29, 2018)
ABSTRACT
We investigate the formation of β-sheet structures in proteins without
sequence-dependent side-chain interactions. To accompli sh this, we introduce
a model which explicitly incorporates both solvation eﬀect s and the angular
dependence (on the protein backbone) of hydrogen bond forma tion. The ther-
modynamics of this model is studied by exploring the density of states for the
entire system and the local couplings in a partially folded s tructure. Our results
suggest that solvation dynamics together with the H-bond an gular dependence
gives rise to a generic cooperativity in this class of system s; this result ex-
plains why pathological aggregates involving β-sheet cores can form from many
diﬀerent proteins. Our work provides the foundation for the construction of
phenomenological models to investigate topology eﬀects in β-sheet folding and
the competition between native folding and non-speciﬁc agg regation.
I. INTRODUCTION
β-sheets are an important element of protein structure, occurrin g often both in functional
units and in pathological aggregates. For example, signaling protein s such as SH3 contain a
βcore. On the other hand, the precursors of amyloidogenesis are c ommonly found to have
aβ-sheet organization1; moreover, a conformational rearrangement can switch a funct ional
β-sheet into an aggregation unit2,3. As they play the role of stabilizing highly organized
2
architectures (eitherpathologicalorfunctional), β-sheetsmustbestronglycooperativeunits,
responsible for lowering the free energy of these folded structur es as compared to entropy-
dominated more irregular patterns.
It is often assumed that hydrophobic interactions are the major f orces contributing to
β-sheet cooperativity and their interacting pattern (i.e., the seque nce design) can deﬁne a
unique fold4. But, one cannot ignore the fact that many neurodegenerative d iseases are
caused by the aggregation of mutant proteins with long hydrophilic sequences (e.g., poly-
glutamine in Huntington disease5); theβ-sheet at the core of these aggregates are certainly
not being stabilized by hydrophobic forces. Indeed, recent exper iments have shown that
peptides with purely hydrophilic sequences can fold β-sheets cooperatively6. Also, growing
evidence suggests that proteins are capable of forming β-sheet aggregates, regardless of their
native folds7. Together with the fact that most amyloidogenetic precursors do not share
any homologous sequence1, it is therefore very likely that throughout the 2-dimensional β-
sheet architecture, formation of an H-bond network can genera te long-range ordering, hence
compensating the mismatch of side-chain interactions and stabilizing the system.
What are the basic diﬀerences between backbone H-bond and side- chain hydrophobic
interactions? Besides the diﬀerence in sequence speciﬁcity discuss ed above, they also diﬀer
in the maximal number of contacts for each interaction unit. Along t he peptide chain,
one amino acid can form at most two backbone H-bonds with adjacen tβ-strands in the
2-dimensional β-sheet structure. In contrast, for each hydrophobic residue in a compact
protein, thenumber offavorable(sequence speciﬁc)contactsc anbemorethantwo; thisleads
to many-body eﬀects that can deﬁne and stabilize a unique fold4,8,9. In most protein folding
literature, thehydrophobic many-body eﬀect ismimicked bytheuse ofG¯ o-typeinteraction10
and sequence-speciﬁc restrictions on the backbone energy11to favor the native state. This
approach, however, is not generally applicable to the case of seque nce-independent β-sheet
formation.
Moreover, from a statistical mechanics prospective, it is well know n that having coop-
erative behavior in a 2-dimensional, pairwise-interacting system req uires more than two
couplings (in average) for each interaction unit12. In protein folding, this corresponds to the
case that folding of a speciﬁc part of the overall structure will aid it s contiguous contact
formation without redundant entropy loss, as brieﬂy discussed by Berrizet al13. At the ﬁrst
glance, this principle does not apply to the case of H-bond network f ormation in an obvious
3
way. Thus, elucidating how the networking of individual H-bond can g ive rise to a stable
folded structure is the major goal of present work.
For this purpose, we study a model system without speciﬁc side-ch ain interaction. It
has already been shown that for β-structured proteins with randomly assigned sequences,
a pure Lennard-Jones potential might not be suﬃcient to provide s ystemic cooperativity,14
and angular dependence in contact formation must be taken into ac count13. Also, there is
growing evidence that solvent eﬀects play a signiﬁcant role in protein folding and conforma-
tional changes15,16,17,18,19. Thus, we introduce a new approach to integrate these two eﬀect s
in modeling H-bond formation. The ingredients of our approach are a “co-plane” parame-
terization of the backbone degrees of freedom with explicit coupling s of solvation dynamics
and the angular dependence of hydrogen-bond formation. The sy stemic cooperativity is
investigated by exploring the density of states for β-sheets of diﬀerent size and structure.
To facilitate the sampling, we have used replica-exchange20and multi-canonical rescaling21
techniques. The originof thisglobal cooperativity isfurther studie d bycomparing energetics
and thermodynamic stability of local sub-structures of model sys tems with diﬀerent types
of interaction potentials.
Our results indicate that it is the de-solvation cavity formation (i.e., t he granularity
of the water molecule) and the hydrogen-bond angular dependenc e that provide β-sheets
with a systemic cooperativity. Since this property is sequence-inde pendent, our results
suggest why β-sheets can generically serve as the building blocks for constructin g functional
macromolecules, and why most functional proteins have the tende ncy to form aggregates at
suﬃciently high concentration.
II. METHOD
A. The model system
The system proposed here is based on the “ball-and-stick” model in troduced in Ref. 22.
In this approach, all NH, C α, CO (represented as C′), and C βside-chains are treated as
lumped balls. The local backbone energy consists of a sum of terms:
1. bond bending: V θ=1
2/summationtextkθ(θi−θ0)2
4
2. dihedral rotations: V ω=1
2/summationtextǫω(1+cosωi), Vφ=1
2/summationtextǫφ(1+cos3φi), Vψ=1
2/summationtextǫψ(1+
cos3ψi),
3. side-chain chirality: V chiral=/summationtextǫchiralΘ/parenleftbig/braceleftbig
[ˆrNCα×ˆrCβCα]·ˆrC′Cα/bracerightbig
i/parenrightbig
with the sum taken over all components (labeled by i), and Θ(s) = (s+|s|)/2. Here, since
we are interested in sequence-independent eﬀects, all side-chain s are treated as polar or
weakly charged groups that favor β-sheet formation, with interaction strengths4,26that are
far less than the magnitude of the H-bond energy and can be gener ally ignored. Also, we
take the parameters kθ= 200kcal/mol·rad2,ǫω= 40kcal/mol,ǫφ=ǫψ= 0.45kcal/mol, and
ǫchiral= 10kcal/mol from Ref. 22.
B. The solvation force ﬁeld
Next, we construct expressions for the non-local interactions. We incorporate the sol-
vation eﬀect into the force law by designing a double-well potential t hat can account for
contact formation and single-H 2O hydration (between the contact pair); the barrier between
the wells corresponds to the free energy cost involved in the trans fer of a water molecule out
of the hydration shell15,23. Multiple shells could be accommodated via a multiple-well po-
tential, but this is not attempted here. The approximation of using a n eﬀective free-energy
is justiﬁed via the observation that transfer of water from within t he vicinity of the contact
pair is faster than the contact formation15,16,17,18.
There is no standard way to construct a continuous de/solvation p otential24which can
be used for Langevin simulations; we note that a previous curve ﬁtt ing eﬀort25and a recent
Monte Carlo study23utilized a discrete version of such a potential. We therefore propos e an
empirical proﬁle based on estimated experimental parameters. Sp eciﬁcally, we will take for
H-bond formation
UHb(r) =A
rk/bracketleftBigg
1
4r3k−/parenleftbigg1
(rc
Hb)k+1
(r∗
Hb)k+1
(rsol
Hb)k/parenrightbigg1
3r2k
+/bracketleftbigg/parenleftbigg1
(rc
Hb)k+1
(r∗
Hb)k/parenrightbigg1
(rsol
Hb)k+1
(rc
Hbr∗
Hb)k/bracketrightbigg1
2rk−1
(rc
Hbr∗
Hbrsol
Hb)k/bracketrightBigg
(1)
Hereris the distance between NH and CO, and the integer k∈N(k= 6, e.g.) is chosen
to give speciﬁc long-range behavior. The values r=rc
Hb,r=r∗
Hb, andr=rsol
Hbrepresent the
5
separation distance at the contact bond position, at the the peak of the desolvation barrier,
and in the presence of a single intervening solvent molecule separatio n, respectively. rsol
Hb
is obtained by adding the known value of rc
Hbto the size of a single H 2O.Aandr∗
Hbcan
be determined by the strengths of the H-bond22and the desolvation barrier; the latter is
approximated by the surface energy involved in forming a desolvatio n cavity, estimated to
equal≈0.103kcal/(mol◦
A2)18. Here we have rc
Hb≈3.43◦
Aandr∗
Hb≈3.92◦
A; these yield a
single H 2O hydration energy of ≈ −0.5 kcal/mol.
Clearly, the design principle behind this type of formula is to have thre e roots for
dUHb(r)/dr= 0 accounting for the desolvation barrier and for the two local minim a; one can
add more roots to address multiple solvation shell eﬀects. Note tha t one might wish to ﬁne-
tune the potential proﬁle more precisely (for instance, by being ab le to independently vary
the width of the contact well). This can be accomplished by a more com plicated expression
(see appendix A). Also, the strength of de/solvation might depend on the hydrophobicity of
local environment (i.e., de-wetting behavior) and one can certainly t ake this into account.
As discussed in22,26, hydrogen bond formation has a strong angular dependence on its
surrounding backbone; thus, one can not fully describe the intera ction using the radial
distance alone. From Fig. 1(d), we note that such an angular depen dence is merely the
requirement that all atoms near to the interacting NH, CO (i.e. the s hadowed area) are
aligned “natively”. In Ref. 22, this “alignment” eﬀect is accomplished by introducing
artiﬁcial repulsive forces between H-bondneighbors. Here, we pr oposeinstead a “functional-
block” (co-plane) scheme.
C. The co-plane approach
From Fig. 1(a), we notice that the peptide backbone between two c ontiguous C αatoms
has a co-planar structure because of the N-C-O bond resonance . This allows us to model the
motion of a “co-plane” as a whole (i.e., with one dihedral angle ωﬁxed to≈180◦). Overall,
each interacting unit in our system is just one block of C αco-plane. The ithco-plane is
deﬁned by three points {X(i)
1,X(i)
2,X(i)
3}where X(i)
1,X(i)
3are simply the two C αin the plane
and X(i)
2is a virtual point satisfying− −−− →
X(i)
1X(i)
2⊥− −−− →
X(i)
2X(i)
3, ﬁg.1(b). Once the degree of freedom
corresponding to this point is speciﬁed, all the atomic locations of th e amide and carbonyl
groups are ﬁxed. Note that a convenient way to deﬁne the arbitra ry point X 2is such that
6
the vector− −−− →
X(i)
2X(i)
3points directly at the C αof the neighboring strand if the system is in
the nativeβ-sheet structure; see ﬁg.1(c). Once X(i)
2is chosen, this determines the in-plane
anglesθ1andθ2as well as the virtual plane projection angle θ3. We computed all these
objects by using the native value of bond angles22and dihedral angles observed in regular
β-sheets (φ∼ −138±1◦,ψ∼135±1◦)26. This leads to all geometrical properties of the
virtual plane, including θ1= 64.7◦,θ2= 62.2◦,θ3= 22.4◦,X1X2= 3.75◦
A,X2X3= 0.57◦
A.
Given the native plane, we deﬁne the range of possible non-native st ructures via allowing
the orientation of the planes to vary. This yields three degrees of f reedom per residue; two
reﬂect the angles needed to deﬁne the direction of the ﬁxed length vector going from one Cα
to the next while the third refers to a rolling of the plane around this v ector. One can then
work out the geometrical problem of expressing, in terms of these degrees of freedom, the
residual terms in the backbone energy arising from the dihedral te rms involving φandψ, the
bendingofthebondangle ∠C′CαN, andtheside-chainchiralitiesbetweenconsecutiveblocks.
Our approach fully maintains the overall translation and rotational degrees of freedom of
the protein molecule. This co-plane parameterization greatly reduc es our computation eﬀort
as compared to all atom backbones, yet maintains the roll degree o f freedom not present in
the simpliﬁed C αmodel. As will be shown later, this degree of freedom is important for the
study ofβ-sheet cooperativity.
D. The structural factor
Now we use the co-plane approach to model the H-bond angular dep endence. From
ﬁg.1(e), we note that having a H-bond between blocks i,jrequires ﬁxing two rotational and
two translational degrees of freedom. More precisely, we need− −−− →
X(i)
1X(i)
2antiparallel to− −−− →
X(j)
1X(j)
2,
and− −−− →
X(i)
2X(i)
3parallel to− −−− →
X(j)
2X(j)
3, whereas for translational alignment, the two sets of points
{X(i)
1,X(j)
2,X(j)
3}and{X(j)
1,X(i)
3,X(i)
2}must be collinear. This leads us to deﬁne a structural
factor that monitors the angular nativeness in the H-bond
x(i,j)
Hb= =1
16/bracketleftbigg
1−/hatwidestX(i)
12·/hatwidestX(j)
12/bracketrightbigg/bracketleftbigg
1+/hatwidestX(i)
23·/hatwidestX(j)
23/bracketrightbigg
×/bracketleftBig
1+cos∠X(j)
2X(i)
1X(j)
3/bracketrightBig/bracketleftBig
1+cos∠X(i)
2X(j)
1X(i)
3/bracketrightBig
(2)
where/hatwidestX(k)
abis the unit vector connecting X(k)
a,X(k)
b. Note that x(i,j)
Hbhas maximum of 1 only
when all the alignment criteria are satisﬁed.
7
We now wish to incorporate this structural factor into the Hamilton ian in such a manner
as to ensure that at small xHb, the two interacting blocks are unlikely to form H-bond. A
simple phenomenological way to proceed is to introduce a potential p roﬁle which has two
parameters dynamically modulated by xHbwith a ﬁxed solvation energy Esol
UHb(r,xHb) =A(xHb)
rk/bracketleftBigg
1
4r3k−/parenleftbigg1
rx
Hbk+1
(r∗
Hb)k+1
(rsol
Hb)k/parenrightbigg1
3r2k
+/bracketleftbigg/parenleftbigg1
rx
Hbk+1
(r∗
Hb)k/parenrightbigg1
(rsol
Hb)k+1
(rx
Hbr∗
Hb)k/bracketrightbigg1
2rk−1
(rx
Hbr∗
Hbrsol
Hb)k/bracketrightBigg
(3)
Here the ﬁrst dynamical parameter A(xHb) is determined by ﬁxing U Hb(rsol
Hb,xHb) =Esoland
for another parameter, we have used a linear relation rx
Hb=xHbrc
Hb+(1−xHb)r∗
Hb. Examples
of this modulated double-well proﬁle areshown in ﬁg.2(a). Note that even incorporated with
this structural factor, the H-bond potential still remains pairwis e between two interacting
blocks.
Aside from the NH ···OC hydrogen bond, we include in our model the bonding between
Cα-H···O=C27. This interaction has a strong chirality22and an angular dependence that
involves at least two contiguous blocks. From ﬁg.1(d), we note that the native conﬁguration
for interacting, consecutive blocks i,i+ 1 andj,j+ 1 (herei(j) + 1 is the block next to
i(j) along the same strand) requires/hatwidestX(i)
23(/hatwidestX(j)
23) antiparallel to/hatwiderX(i+1)
23(/hatwiderX(j+1)
23). Therefore, in
analogy to the aforementioned H-bond ,we propose a structural f actor for this additional
interaction
x(i,j)
chiral=1
4xHb(i,j)xHb(i+1,j+1)/bracketleftbigg
1−/hatwidestX(i)
23·/hatwiderX(i+1)
23/bracketrightbigg/bracketleftbigg
1−/hatwidestX(j)
23·/hatwiderX(j+1)
23/bracketrightbigg
(4)
with an interaction potential U CαH−OC(r,xchiral) taken to be similar to U Hb(r,xHb). We use
a Cα-H···O=C interaction strength half that of a single H-bond27.
E. The role of the force ﬁeld
To characterize the roles of structural factors and solvation eﬀ ects inβ-sheet formation,
we have studied four diﬀerent forms of the H-bond potential. Thes e are:
•(A) LJfix:Ufix
LJ(r) =|EHb|(rc
Hb)6
r6/bracketleftBig
(rc
Hb)6
r6−2/bracketrightBig
, a L-J potential without angular depen-
dence.
8
•(B) Solfix:Ufix
Sol(r)⇒eqn.(1), a double-well solvation potential without angular
dependence.
•(C) LJang:Uang
LJ(r) =ALJ(xHb)[rLJ(xHb)]6
r6/bracketleftBig
[rLJ(xHb)]6
r6−2/bracketrightBig
, a 2-dynamical-parameter L-
J potential with our proposed angular dependence. This proﬁle is de signed to help
distinguish the eﬀects of solvation and structural factors. Thus , except for the ab-
sence of a desolvation barrier, this potential is quite similar to the so lvation one,
eqn.(3). Explicitly, we let a non-native alignment factor xHb<1 give rise to a
linear shift |Uang
LJ(rLJ(xHb))|=ALJ(xHb) =xHb|EHb|+ (1−xHb)|Esol|for the ﬁrst
parameter. Also, to achieve a repulsive eﬀect similar to that in eqn.(3 ), we set
Uang
LJ(rx
Hb) = UHb(rx
Hb,xHb), i.e.,rLJ(xHb) =rx
Hb(1+/radicalbig
1+UHb(rx
Hb,xHb)/ALJ(xHb))1/6
for the second parameter. Fig.2(b) shows the modulation of this fo rce ﬁeld due to
varying of structural factor.
•(D) Solang:Uang
Solv(r)⇒eqn.(3), the de/solvation potential with the proposed angular
dependence, which constitutes our full model.
F. The replica-exchange and Multi-canonical Technique
Throughout the entire paper, the simulation procedure employed a modiﬁed Verlet-
Langevin algorithm. Speciﬁcally, for a particular set of coordinate /vector x(t) with velocity /vector v(t)
and force/vectorf(t), the update at time t, ∆/vector x(t)≡/vector x(t+∆t)−/vector x(t) is obtained by
/vector x(t±∆t) =/vector x(t)±/vector v∆t+∆t2
2m/vectorf+O(∆t3)
/vector x(t+∆t)−/vector x(t−∆t) = 2/vector v(t)∆t+O(∆t3)
/vector x(t+∆t)+/vector x(t−∆t) = 2/vector x(t)+∆t2
m/vectorf(t)+O(∆t4)
= 2/vector x(t)+∆t2
m/bracketleftBig
−ζ/vector v(t)−/vector∇xE+η(t)/bracketrightBig
+O(∆t4)
⇒∆/vector x(t) =/bracketleftBigg
1−ζ∆t
2m
1+ζ∆t
2m/bracketrightBigg
∆/vector x(t−∆t)+∆t2/bracketleftBig
−/vector∇xE+η(t)/bracketrightBig
m+ζ∆t/2+O(∆t4) (5)
withm,ζ,E≡H({/vectorx}),ηasmass, viscosity, energy(Hamiltonian), anduncorrelatedtherm al
noise, respectively, where {/vector x}represents the set of coordinates for entire system. Since the
coordinates used in our simulations represent C αco-planes, the mass mand the radius for
9
viscosityζare approximated from the mass of a single glutamine and the C αbond length,
respectively.
The replica-exchange method20and multi-canonical rescaling technique21are used to
obtain the density of states n(E) and hence thermodynamic properties of any given system.
First, several simulations are performed at diﬀerent temperatur es. To enhance the sampling,
conﬁgurations obtained at diﬀerent temperatures T,T′were switched in between based on
the Metropolis criterion20that obeys detail balance,
P/parenleftBig/bracketleftBig
{/vector x}T,{/vectorx′}T′/bracketrightBig
→/bracketleftBig
{/vectorx′}T,{/vector x}T′/bracketrightBig/parenrightBig
=

1 if ∆ ≤0,
e−∆if ∆>0.(6)
with∆ = [1 /T−1/T′][E({/vectorx′})−E({/vector x})](seeRef. 20andreferencesthereinformoredetails).
Second, an initial guess of n(E) is obtained by using a WHAM (weighted histogram analysis
method)-like procedure14,20,
Pβ(E) =n(E)e−βE
/summationtext
En(E)e−βE
⇒n(E)∝/bracketleftBigg/summationdisplay
βe−βE
Pβ(E)/bracketrightBigg−1
(7)
whereβ= 1/kBT(kBis Boltzmann factor) and Pβ(E) is the probability of energy distribu-
tion accumulated from simulations at temperature T= 1/kBβ.
Then, we performed multi-canonical rescaling simulations to reﬁne n(E), in which we
used the same Hamiltonian but the forces in equation of motion (5) we re rescaled as
/vector∇E→∂E′(E,T)
∂E/vector∇EwithE′(E,T) as a trial function. This rescaling will yield a proba-
bility distribution Pβ(E)∝n(E)e−βE′(E,T); thus, if we choose E′(E,T)∼kBTlnn(E),
Pβ(E) will become relatively ﬂat and hence the sampling become more accur ate (see21and
reference therein for detailed discussion). Finally, the reﬁned n(E) is obtained iteratively,
n(E)i∝/bracketleftBigg/summationdisplay
βe−βE′(E,1/β)i
Pβ(E)i/bracketrightBigg−1
=/bracketleftBigg/summationdisplay
βe−lnn(E)(i−1)
Pβ(E)i/bracketrightBigg−1
=n(E)(i−1)/summationtext
β[Pβ(E)i]−1(8)
whereiindexes the iterations.
G. The local melting approach
Aside from examining the global cooperativity, we have also explored the thermody-
namics of local binding events in the model system. The idea is that in t he absence of
10
hydrophobic clustering, the system cooperativity (if any) must ar ise from a scaling up of
small scale bound structures. In other words, folding of a speciﬁc part of the overall struc-
ture will be aided by any contiguous folded regions28; this can be investigated by exploring
the conditional probabilities of residues of being folded (i.e., in their na tive position and
orientation) or unfolded depending on whether their neighbors are folded or unfolded (i.e.,
the contact correlations). Speciﬁcally, we investigated two cases ; the ensemble that has all
blocks retained in their folded conﬁgurations aside from either a) a f ew blocks at the end of
oneβ-strand or b) a few blocks buried inside the sheet.
To study these local sub-structures, we have assumed here tha t their thermodynamics
will not be aﬀected signiﬁcantly by the dynamics of very distant block s. This allows us to
compute a “conditional” partition function in which, except for thos e speciﬁed blocks, the
rest can be treated as frozen in their native positions. Doing this, t he number of degrees
of freedom is signiﬁcantly reduced and the conditional partition fun ction can be obtained
by explicit numerical integration. For instance, in the single-block β-tail case, the partition
function reads/integraltext
dX2dX3δ(X1X2−X1X2N)δ(X2X3−X2X3N)e−H/kBTwhereX1X2N= 3.75◦
A,
X2X3N= 0.57◦
Aare native constants, and X 2, X3are the virtual points of the movable
terminal block (note that its X 1is ﬁxed). Then, because of the δfunctions, the partition
function is reduced to an integral over three angles deﬁning the or ientation of the terminal
plane.
III. RESULTS
A. Global Cooperativity
The ﬁrst system we studied is a 3-strand β-sheet with a total of 6 H-bonds equally
distributed between adjacent strands. Since there is no sequenc e speciﬁcity, we artiﬁcially
tethered the H-bonds at the 2 expected turns to maintain the β-sheet propensity. In Fig. 3,
we show the computed speciﬁc heat for the four diﬀerent model fo rces. Basically, we found
that there is no sharp transition for the three models LJfix, LJang, Solfixif non-speciﬁc
H-bonds are allowed to develop on the peptide backbone; this is beca use their dominant low-
energy states are ensembles with non-speciﬁc, randomly collapsed structures rather than a
uniquely deﬁned β-sheet (similar to the results observed by Guo & Brooks14). The complete
11
model Solang, however, can deﬁne a unique native state and give rise to a sharp t ransition,
as seen in Fig. 3(a).
Next, we added a G¯ o-like restriction to the models LJfix, LJang, Solfix, i.e., allowing
H-bond formation only between those residues that have such an in teraction in the native
β-sheet structure10. Of course, the entire justiﬁcation of this approach is absent in sy stems
with homogeneous interaction as the one of primary concern here, but it is still worthwhile
comparing the results of our proposed complete model with these a lternatives. Note how-
ever that our G¯ o-like restriction does not include any additional re strictions on backbone
conﬁgurations to favor a particular structure (i.e., native state) ; this is very diﬀerent from
the energetic restrictions commonly used in the oﬀ-lattice protein f olding literature11. In
Fig. 3(b), we show that even with G¯ o-like restrictions to reduce th e non-speciﬁc collapsed
ensemble, the LJfixmodel can not give rise to a sharp transition compared with models
incorporating either the de/solvation eﬀect or angular dependenc y. This is consistent with
results from other group13and also the aforementioned reasoning that with only two contact
couplings foreach interacting unit, a simple forceﬁeld forH-bondfo rmationcannot produce
systemic cooperativity.
The diﬀerence between the various force models becomes much clea rer in larger systems.
Fig. 3(c) shows the speciﬁc heat diagrams for a 4-strand β-sheet with a total of 15 H-bonds
equally distributed between adjacent strands. Now, without a sign iﬁcant increase in the
transition temperature, the peak magnitude of the speciﬁc heat f or model Solangis 100 fold
larger than that of the previous small system, whereas there is st ill no signiﬁcant transition
for the L-J G¯ o-like potential. This diﬀerence is further realized by e xamining the density of
states. In Fig. 4(a), we note that there is only one dominant ensem ble for model LJfixin
the low-energy region; this ensemble mixes the native and partially fo lded states. In model
LJang, on the other hand, the unfolded ensemble ( E∼0) is slightly separated from the
folded one; however, the folded phase has a larger entropy than t hat of the unfolded state,
and thus there is no transition. In the solvation model, as shown in Fig . 4(b), there is a
clear separation between the folded and unfolded ensemble, with th e unfolded states having
the largest entropy, as is crucial for having a sharp transition.
Apparently, boththe angular dependence andsolvation eﬀect sligh tly enhance the system
cooperativity, but only a combination of both can yield the desired re sults in the system of
primary concern here. This point has not been adequately address ed in previous works13,14.
12
Also, we notice a high energy population appearing in model LJang, Solfix, and Solang. Ana-
lyzing the contact proﬁle in this additional phase, we found that its d ominant conﬁgurations
are those with signiﬁcant intervening of folding and unfolding in the en tire structure, i.e.,
“droplet”-like structures28,29. As will be elucidated in next section, this intervening can lead
to an interfacial energetic penalty resulting from backbone twistin g (enhanced by the an-
gular dependence) and (re)-desolvation barrier crossing at the in terface between contiguous
folded and unfolded regions; thus the partially unfolded ensemble is s hifted from low energy
(as in model LJfix) to the high energy region. Consequently, the completely folded an d
unfolded ensemble are well separated, leading to a sharp transition .
Of course, whether these partially folded droplet conﬁgurations c an be shifted to high
energy depends not only on the choice of the H-bond potential (to create the interfacial
penalty), but also the topology of the β-sheet. When the H-bond energy inside the folded
droplet can compensate the interfacial penalty, the structure w ill no longer stay at high-
energy phase. To show this explicitly, we studied a system that is less symmetric on the
β-sheet plane; we chose a 3-strand β-sheet with long strands, looking at the eﬀect of in-
creasing the strand length. We started with a 3-strand β-sheet with a total of 30 H-bonds
equally distributed between adjacent strands. Fig. 5(a,b) shows it sn(E) and speciﬁc heat,
which are very similar to those of the 4-strand, 15 H-bond system, in that they both have
well-separated unfolded/native states, and partially unfolded high -energy populations. An-
alyzing the states in the low and high energy partially folded ensembles , we found that their
dominant conﬁgurations are droplets with one (in the low energy pha se) or multiple (in the
high energy phase) interfaces between contiguous un/folded reg ions, i.e., a partially folded
β-sheet (or hairpin) buried in unfolded coils (illustrated by examples in F ig. 5(a)).
Whenthesystem size increases toatotalof40H-bonds, however , (see Fig.6(a,b)), weﬁnd
an increased weight for the partially folded ensemble in the low energy phase ranging from
0>E >E NwhereENis the native state energy. Unlike the smaller, or symmetric system,
here the interfacial energy penalty between contiguous un/folde d regions, can not compete
with the large H-bond energy at the bulky folded portion; this allows t he partially folded
ensemble tohavealowenergy. Moreover, inasystem withsuch anelo ngatedasymmetry, the
partiallyfoldedportioncanfreelymove alongthe β-sheet, orfreely slidealongthechain with
many “mis-pairing” H-bonds (i.e., inconsistent with native pairing). Bo th eﬀects can then
increase the entropy of the partially folded (or even misfolded) ens emble and hence smears
13
out the separation between completely un/folded ensemble and par tially folded ensemble,
Fig. 6(a). The smearing becomes more signiﬁcant in a larger 3-stran dβ-sheet with a
total of 50 H-bonds, Fig. 6(c). As a consequence, the system be comes less cooperative
and an additional continuous transition occurs between these par tially un/folded ensemble,
ﬁg.6(b,c). Developing a phenomenological model based on these res ults to study how the
system cooperativity depends on the β-sheet topology, therefore, is one of our future goals.
B. Local Bonding Eﬀects
In this section, we examine how the model system acquires “global” c ooperativity (in
the absence of hydrophobic clustering) by exploring the thermody namic eﬀects of local
un/bonding. Here, since we are dealing with only a small number of deg rees of freedom, we
couldcalculateallthermodynamicpropertiesbyexplicitintegrationo fthepartitionfunction.
As an illustration, we ﬁrst present the results of the single-block β-tail case, Fig. 7, where
we plotted the probability distribution function (pdf) P(r) of the interacting distance rin
the native NH ···OC pair between the terminal block (the one allowed to ﬂuctuate) an d its
native partner (taken to be frozen in space).
In this case, the maximum possible NH ···OC distance as determined by the range of
integration, is smaller than that necessary to ﬁt a water molecule in b etween and thus there
cannot be any true secondary solvated minimum. We do see however the fact that having
the solvation barrier and (to a lesser extent) the angular factors make a big diﬀerence in
the structure of P(r). Speciﬁcally, there is no hint of well-separated 2-state behavior f or
model LJfix. However, a small barrier appears if the potential has an angular d ependence
(modelLJang), andbecomessigniﬁcant ifsolvationeﬀectsareincluded(modelSo lfix, Solang).
Here, we note that because of the bond angle ∠C′CαN potential, P(r) is concentrated on
the “ring” that satisﬁes ∠C′CαN =∠C′CαNnative. On this ring, only a few “points” will
give minimal dihedral angle ( ψ,φ) energies. These points correspond to the sharp peaks in
ﬁg.7 that have free energy diﬀerence ≈ǫψ+ǫφ≈1kcal/mol from their surrounding; if we
reduce the bond angle stiﬀness kθ, these sharp peaks become broadened (data not shown).
Apparently, this eﬀect comes from the backbone energy and is inde pendent of the choice of
H-bond potential.
Next, we studied the“buried” cases with nblocks allowed to ﬂuctuate. In this situation,
14
the conﬁgurations of ﬂuctuating blocks are clearly constrained to a great extent by their
ﬁxed neighbors. Thus, we found that for n= 1, there is neither 2-state behavior nor any
qualitative diﬀerence among the results of diﬀerent force ﬁelds (da ta not shown); all signiﬁ-
cant probability is conﬁned in the H-bond well, indicating a strong topo logical conﬁnement
toforcethefoldingofasingleunfoldedblockburiedamidst foldedone s. Whenn= 2, westill
do not have enough freedom of backbone motion to allow for a solvat ed second minimum for
the main H-bond; the maximum separation is slightly above 4.1◦
A, Fig. 8(a). Nonetheless,
we see clear diﬀerences among diﬀerent models. For the simplest LJfixmodel, there is no
conﬁnement to a narrow contact well. Adding the angular factor ba ck in, we create a barrier
as the NH ···OC distance is increased. This barrier is due to the modulation of the L J po-
tential by the angular factor, making it repulsive if the orientation is not properly matched.
Alternatively, adding the solvation eﬀect as in model Solfixalso introduces a barrier; this is
because rolling of the co-plane allows for a wide separation (and henc e going up and down
the solvation barrier) in the C αH···OC interactions. Finally, putting both eﬀects in leads
to a very large degree of conﬁnement in the H-bond well, suggesting that local coupling is
enhanced by both structural and solvation eﬀects such that an u nfolded block is strongly
biased to fold if contiguous to folded ones.
To further characterize the diﬀerence between the varying choic es of force models, we
explored the un/folding correlation in the 2-block buried case. Spec iﬁcally, we computed
the conditional probability function P(r) for one block with respect to the un/folding state
of another (deﬁned as folded/unfolded if its native H-bond separa tionr2≷r∗
Hb),P(r1|r2>
r∗
Hb),P(r1|r2<r∗
Hb), wherer1,r2are their native H-bond separations, respectively. In other
words, if the system has a good local coupling, un/folding of one bloc k should force the
un/folding of another, implying a well-separated P(r1|r2≷r∗
Hb). In Fig. 8(b), however,
we found that P(r1|r2≷r∗
Hb) are well separated only in model Solang. Here, the separated
probability distributions have been individually normalized; the actual probability for being
at the larger ris extremely small as is evident from Fig. 8(a). Also, note that it is not r
in the ﬁgure which is important - this H-bond separation is quite small. I nstead, the two
peakscorrespond toeither having thefullH-bondenergy(bysat isfyingboththedistance and
angular conditions) or not having that energy; the distribution at la rgerrdoes not have the
correct angular conﬁguration. To clarify this point, we plotted the conditional probability
function on the variation of H-bond energy Einstead of distance r, i.e.,P(E1(r1)|r2>
15
r∗
Hb),P(E1(r1)|r2<r∗
Hb), Fig. 8(b). Now, we see clearly that only the full model Solanghas
a signiﬁcant separation eﬀect.
C. Collective Re-solvation Kinetics
The conclusion from the local coupling studies is that the full model b eing proposed here
leads to strong correlations between the behaviors of neighboring blocks. For the system as
a whole, this should mean that complicated conﬁgurations with repea ted interfaces between
unfolded and folded residues would cause additional energetic pena lties and thus can be
strongly suppressed in favor of simpler conﬁgurations with large pa tches of residues being
either all in contact or all not in contact. Of course, whether the s ystem can therefore
acquire an global cooperativity would depend on its topology as well, a s revealed in earlier
section.
Now, the interesting part of this conclusion, as will be illustrated late r, is that during
unfolding (folding), the solvation (desolvation) process must occu r in a collective way. To
see this explicitly, we show the pdf and re-solvation kinetics of a 10-b lock buried case in Fig.
9(a,b). Because of the large barrier needed to melt the blocks, her e we set the simulation
temperature far beyond the physiological range.
From Fig. 9(a) (using Solang), we note that the pdf of native H-bond distances are well
separated by a free energy (- kBTlnP(r)) barrier, resulting in an ordered (H-bond formed)
and disordered (H-bond not formed) phases. Interestingly, eve n governed by the same force
law, the un/folding barriers for the various molten blocks are not qu ite the same. For blocks
close to the conﬁned ones (those frozen in the space), the barrie r progressively increases, and
the disordered phase becomes less signiﬁcant. This reduction of dis ordered phase manifests
a stronger folding bias for any unfolded residues near those folded ones. Thus it is not
eﬀective to unbind the blocks one by one, since the unbound block will rebind long before
its neighbor has unbound. This can be seen in the high-temperature unfolding simulation,
Fig. 9(b), in which we note that the resolvation (i.e., inﬁltration of wat er molecules) process
involved many residues simultaneously. In Fig. 9(c), we show that th is collective water
inﬁltration indeed occurs in unfolding of the entire β-sheet.
16
IV. DISCUSSION
Wehave explored themechanism of β-sheet cooperativitywithout side-chain interactions,
with diﬀerent choices of the H-bond potential. Our results suggest that in the absence of
hydrophobic clustering, the β-sheet cooperativity arises from a coupling of structural factor
(contact angular dependence), protein de/solvation eﬀects, an d the system topology. Since
this phenomenon is sequence-independent, the results can be con sidered to apply in general
toβ-sheet structures.
Given the coupling number for each H-bond interacting unit, our res ults diﬀer from most
2-dimensional pairwise-interacting system, in that there the minima l number of coupling
required for global cooperativity is larger than the one present he re. Thus, the coupling
between backbone energy (the angular dependence) and pairwise H-bond interaction (in-
corporated with solvation dynamics) must yield a strong many-body eﬀect, which has been
argued to be crucial to produce systemic cooperativity in homogen eous system such as are
the primary concern here28. Apparently, our model system has a default many-body eﬀect,
the dihedral conﬁnement via the corresponding terms in the backb one energy.
As illustrated in our study, when the system is close to the fully folded state, the dihedral
conﬁnement is strong enough to complete the folding (the n= 1-block case). However, it
is too weak to conﬁne the backbone collectively if there is a larger unf olded portion in the
β-sheet, as illustrated in the pure Lennard-Jones potential case. Instead, it is the angular
dependence which incorporates the contact strength into the ba ckbone Hamiltonian and
thus ampliﬁes the conﬁnement. This leads to a competition with solvat ion dynamics; in
other words, while the solvent tries to pull the interacting blocks ap art, the conﬁning force
ampliﬁed by folded neighbors can hold them back. As this behavior occ urs mainly between
contiguous un/folded regions, it creates an “interfacial” energet ic penalty and the “droplet”
picture proposed in previous works28,29(now allowing a measurement the droplet surface
tension). Consequently, in a partially folded structure, any small r egions of unfolded blocks
contiguous to folded ones are thermodynamically unfavorable and w ill be forced to fold
or will unfold the folded ones28. Thus, while there has been a concentration of eﬀort on
understanding the role the sequence heterogeneity for protein f olding and design, we would
like to point out that this generic cooperativity buried in the β-sheet architecture can also
serve as a building block to construct macromolecular structure. However, this same build ing
17
block can also provides the mechanism for pathological aggregation .
What then would be the physiological role and evolutionary principle of having sequence
heterogeneity, in the presence of possible β-architectures? Certainly, with the fast time scale
(of order of 0 .1 ns, estimated from our Langevin simulations) for a single C αblock folding,
any pre-folded β-architecture with ordered, exposed amide and carbonyl oxygen could lead
to a seeding process and non-speciﬁcally precipitate surrounding u nfolded peptides; this
has been observed in the elongation process of amyloidogenesis3. The physiological role of
heterogeneity, therefore, would be to either distort the orienta tion of exposed amide and
carbonyl groups into a non-aggregation competent form, or pro vide “hot” nuclei to bias
the system into the native fold. Indeed, this idea has been veriﬁed in a recent tryptophan
zipper model30. Exploring the competition between native folding due to speciﬁc seq uence
heterogeneity and pathological aggregation due to generic coope rativity is perhaps the most
important direction for future study.
As a side point, to elucidate the eﬀect of local un/binding, we have int roduced a local
melting method. This method can be further used to explore local nu cleation or de-solvation
events in any system lacking long-ranged spatial couplings. Also, ins tead of simulating
all backbone atoms or a simpliﬁed C αmodel, a functional block (co-plane) approach was
proposed. This approach greatly reduces our computational eﬀo rt; however, it still keeps
the right angular degrees of freedom (missing in C αmodel) and gives rise to a structural
factor (i.e., backbone alignment) that helps account for β-sheet cooperativity.
Also, we have introduced an approach to de/solvation which can be u sed directly for
Langevin simulations. It has been noticed that the (de)-solvation e ﬀects are important in
protein folding and functioning, but no standard model has been pr oposed15,16,17,18,19,23,24,25.
Also, we note that solvent dynamics can be regulated by system hyd rostatic pressure15.
Interestingly, many adhesion and hemostasis-related proteins ar e very sensitive to shear
stress and pressure change; perhaps a local de/re-solvation ev ent might trigger a cooperative
conformational change which ultimately has large scale consequenc es19. Thus, microscopic
cooperativity can be ampliﬁed into a macroscopic response; this also needs to be explored
in future work.
18
V. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
CG wishes to acknowledge Peter G. Wolynes, Jose N. Onuchic, Angel E. Garcia, Tobin
R. Sosnick, Joan-Emma Shea, and Ken A. Dill for comments the solva tion model, and
Christopher M. Dobson for comments on sequence-independent m echanism. He also thanks
to A.E. Garcia for a careful reading on the manuscript.
1M. Sunde, L.C. Serpell, M. Bartlam, P.E. Fraser, M.B. Pepys, and C.C. Blake, J. Mol. Biol.
273,729 (1997).
2K. Liu, H.S. Cho, H.A. Lashuel, J.W. Kelly, and D.E. Wemmer, N at. Struc. Biol. 7,754 (2000).
3J.W. Kelly, Nat. Struc. Biol. 7,824 (2000).
4A. Fersht, in Structure and mechanism in protein science. (W.H. Freeman & Company. New
York, 1999) Chapter 17.
5M.F. Perutz and A.H. Windle, Nature 412,143 (2001). M.F. Perutz, T. Johnson, M. Suzuki,
and J.T. Finch, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 91,5355 (1994).
6S. Koide, X. Huang, K. Link, A. Koide, Z. Bu, and D.M. Engelman , Nature 403,456 (2000).
7M. F¨ andrich, M.A. Fletcher, and C.M. Dobson, Nature 410,169 (2001).
8T. Kortemme, M. Ramirez-Alvarado, and L. Serrano, Science 281,253 (1998).
9N.V. Dokholyan, S.V. Buldyrev, H.E. Stanley, and E.I. Shakh novich, J. Mol. Biol. 296,1183
(2000).
10Y. Ueda, H. Taketomi, and N. G¯ o, Biopolymers 17, 1531 (1978).
11C. Clementi, H. Nymeyer, and J.N. Onuchic. J. Mol. Biol. 298,937 (2000).
12R.K. Pathria, Statistical Mechanics (Butterworth Heinemann, Oxford, 1996), Chapter. 12.
13G.F. Berriz, A.M. Gutin, and E.I. Shkhnovich, J. Chem. Phys. 106,9276 (1997).
14Z. Guo and C.L. Brooks, Biopolymers, 42,745 (1997).
15G. Hummer, S. Garde, A.E. Garcia, M.E. Paulaitis, and L.R. Pr att, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA.95,1552 (1998).
16A.E. Garcia and G. Hummer, Protein: Structure, Function, & G enetics.38,261 (2000).
17J.D. Dunitz, Science 264,670 (1997).
18H.S. Ashbaugh, E.W. Kaler, and M.E. Paulaitis, J. Am. Chem. S oc.121,9243 (1999).
19
19R. Celikel, Z.M. Ruggeri, and K.I. Varughese, K.I. Nat. Stru c. Biol.7,881 (2000); P. Marchese,
E. Saldivar, J. Ware, and Z.M. Ruggeri, Z.M. Proc. Natl. Acad . Sci. USA. 96,7837 (1999).
20Y. Sugita, A. Kitao, and Y. Okamoto, J. Chem. Phys. 113,6042 (2000).
21U.H.E. Hansmann, Y. Okamoto, and F. Eisenmenger, Chem. Phys . Lett.259,321 (1996).
22S. Takada, Z. Luthey-Schulten, and P.G. Wolynes, J. Chem. Ph ys.110,11616 (1999).
23N. Helson, J.N. Onuchic, and A.E. Garcia, Proc. Natl. Acad. S ci. USA. 96,14848 (1999).
24B. Roux, and T. Simonson, Biophys. Chem. 78, 1 (1999).
25Head-Gordon, T., Stillinger, F.H. J. Chem. Phys. 98,3313 (1993).
26T.E. Creighton, in Proteins: structure and molecular properties (W.H. Freeman and Company.
New York. 1996) Chapter 4 & 5.
27R. Vargas, J. Garza, D.A. Dixon, B.P. Hay, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 122,4750 (2000).
28C. Guo, H. Levine, and D.A. Kessler, Phys. Rev. Lett. 84,3490 (2000); Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
USA.97,10775 (2000).
29P.G. Wolynes, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 94,6170 (1997).
30A.G. Cochran, N.J. Skelton, and M.A. Starovasnik, Proc. Nat l. Acad. Sci. USA 98,5578 (2001).
20
VI. FIGURE CAPTIONS
Fig.1 (a) The co-planar structure with (b)the three virtual points {X1,X2,X3}and
dihedral angles ω,φ,ψlabeled. The virtual bond lengths and angles are determined so as
to give(c)a regular, symmetric β-sheet structure with side-chains and C αH bonds alter-
nately pointing up and down periodically. (d)The side-chain and C α-H···OC interactions
are indicated by light-gray, gray arrows, respectively, with the sh adowed area indicating the
atoms involved determining the angular dependence of a single H-bon d.(e)If two interact-
ing blocksi,jare to have a native H-bond (the gray arrow), proper alignment of two pairs
of planar vectors and collinearity of the two sets of points (X(i)
1,X(j)
2,X(j)
3; X(j)
1,X(i)
3,X(i)
2) are
required.
Fig.2The structural-factor-dependent H-bond potential proﬁles in u nits of kcal/mol
with interaction distance r(NH···OC) measured in◦
A.(a)The (de)-solvation force ﬁeld
UHb(r,xHb). The barrier height between r=r∗
Hband the solvent-separated minimum ( r=
rsol
Hb) represents the free energy cost in desolvation cavity formation . Here we have graphed
UHb(r,xHb) fromxHb= 0 to 1. The dashed curve represents the modulation of the conta ct
minimum (rx
Hb,UHb(rx
Hb,xHb)).(b)The Lennard-Jones force ﬁeld Uang
LJ(r), where the proﬁle
is modulated by changing the contact minimum (long-dashed curve) |Uang
LJ(rLJ(xHb))|=
xHb|EHb|+(1−xHb)|Esol|from the H-bond contact energy EHbto the single H 2O hydration
Esol. The major diﬀerence between (a)and(b)is the desolvation barrier.
Fig.3 (a) The speciﬁc heat for a 3-strand with 6 H-bonds modeled by diﬀerent force
ﬁelds (without G¯ o-like restrictions). Here, because of the absen ce of G¯ o-like pairing, the
three force ﬁeld LJfix, LJang, and Solfixare unable to deﬁne a unique structure and hence
there is no obvious peak (i.e., transition) in their CV diagrams. Wherea s force ﬁeld Solang
can deﬁne unique β-sheet and hence leads to a sharper transition. (b)Same as (a)except
for the G¯ o-like restrictions to model LJfix, LJang, and Solfixhere. Note that the transitions
for these three force ﬁelds become more apparent but still not co mpatible with Solang.(c)
The speciﬁc heat for a 4-strand with 15 H-bonds modeled by diﬀeren t force ﬁelds. Now the
transition for Solangbecome much stronger and there is almost no transition for L-J typ e
force ﬁelds (inset).
Fig.4The density of state for a 4-strand β-sheet with 15 H-bonds. (a):The density
of state for L-J type potential (with G¯ o-like restrictions). Note the distribution of entropy
21
and the high-energy population appearing in model LJang; this population contains partially
folded state. (b):The density of state for Sol type potential. Note that a good sepa ration
between the unfolded and folded ensemble only appeared in model So lang.
Fig.5The density of state (a):n(E), speciﬁc heat (b)Cv=∂/angbracketleftE/angbracketright
∂T, and energy ∝an}b∇acketle{tE∝an}b∇acket∇i}ht(inset
in(b)) for system asymmetrically elongated at one direction on its β-sheet plane (using
model Solang). Here the system is a 3-strand β-sheet with total 30 H-bonds equally dis-
tributed between adjacent strands. Note the suppression of low -energy ensemble (between
the completely unfolded and native states) and the appearance of high-energy population.
The dominant conﬁgurations in these ensemble (insets) are “drople ts” with interfaces be-
tweencontiguousun/foldedregions. Notethatthelow-energyco nﬁgurationhaslessinterface
compared with high-energy one. The negative energy of the unfold ed state comes from the
two tethered β-turns.
Fig.6 (a): Then(E) for a 3-strand β-sheet with total 40 H-bonds. Note the growth of
partially folded ensemble (inset in (a)is a typical example of their conﬁgurations) at low-
energy phase and smears out the separation between unfolded an d the native states. This
can lead to an abrupt transition (with the native state) at low tempe rature phase (pointed
by double arrows in (b)) and a continuous transition (with other high-energy unfolded
states) at high temperature phase (pointed by a single arrow in (b)). When the system size
increases to totally 50 H-bonds (c), the smearing becomes more signiﬁcant (arrow in (c))
and the system eventually loses its cooperativity.
Fig.7The numerical results for the probability distribution function (pdf )P(r) of
NH···OC separation rof the “molten” block respective to its native partner in the β-
tail single-block case (indicated in the inserted diagram; black: froz en, gray: mobile). Here
temperature: 25◦C and integration step δθ= 10−4. Also, the curves have been adjusted
up/downward for a better visual comparison. Note that the barr ier for model Solfixis much
larger than that of Solang. This is because the desolvation barrier height is ﬁxed in the
former case, but modulated (by the angular factor) in the latter o ne.
Fig.8The numerical results for buried two-block cases. (a)The pdfP(r) for the native
H-bond separation (average of the two symmetric mobile blocks). (b)The normalized
conditional pdf in ﬁrst molten block, P(r1), with respect to whether the second block is
unfolded (deﬁned as if r2≥r∗
Hb) or folded (deﬁned as if r2< r∗
Hb). Herer1,r2are the
H-bond separations of the two molten blocks with their native partn er, respectively, and
22
/integraltext
dr1P(r1|r2≷r∗
Hb) = 1.(c)The normalized conditional pdf in ﬁrst molten block, P(E1),
plotted on its H-bond energy E1.
Fig.9 (a): Langevin simulation results of a ten-block buried case. Each curve r epresents
the corresponding block in the inset diagram, averaged over the sy mmetrical pair. The
simulation is averaged over 25 series of 1 ms runs (∆ t= 5×10−5ps).(b):Snapshot
of re-solvation simulation at T = 850◦K where each heavy atom is labeled by diﬀerent
symbols depending on the corresponding H-bond interacting distan cer: “•” (r<r∗
Hb), “◦”
(r∗
Hb≤r < rsol
Hb), and “ ” ( r≥rsol
Hb).(c):Snapshot of unfolding simulation of a 4-strand
β-sheet with 15 H-bonds at T = 800◦K where we have tethered the H-bond at the turn area
to maintain the β-turn propensity. The time courses are plotted on the change of t otal H-
bond (indicated by r≤r∗
Hb) number Q Hband energy E Hb(kcal/mol), and conﬁgurations at
diﬀerent snapshots (a,b,c,d,e) areprojected toleft-handside. No te thesuccessive inﬁltration
of water, and the overshot of E Hbat the abrupt transition point, manifesting a collective
barrier crossing for the re-solvation process.
APPENDIX A: MODIFIED DESOLVATION POTENTIAL
The simpliﬁed double-well potential provides the basic insight on how d e/solvation eﬀect
involves in protein cooperativity. However, one might wish to modify t his model to include
more control parameters. For this purpose, we propose an alter native potential
UHB(r) =

−B(r−r1)2−h1
(r−r1)2m+h2ifr>rx1,
Ay(r){[y(r)]2+b}+UHB(rx1) ifr≤rx1
with

y(r) =z(r)[z(r)−1]
z(r)+s,
z(r) =rx1/r−1
rx1/rx0−1
andras the distance between NH and CO, ﬁg.1 (a). Here, the interacting distance for
formation of contact, desolvation barrier, and single-solvent sep aration are r=r0,r=r1,
r=r2, with free energy amplitude D0,D1,D2, respectively, and the width of the contact
well is controlled by the span between r=rx0andr=rx1. Normally, r2is separated from
r0by the size of a single water molecule. The integer m >2, on the other hand, is chosen
for the long-distance behavior, and the six unknowns B,h1,h2,A,b,scan be determined by
D0,D1,D2,r0,r2and one continuity requirement (dU HB/dr atr=rx1). Using this model,
23
one has a complete control on the potential proﬁle (the well width f or the contact entropy,
e.g.).
To incorporate the fully Lennard-Jones behavior into the proﬁle at both short ( r≪r∗
Hb)
and long (r≫rsol
Hb) range region, we also proposed another force ﬁeld
UHB(r) =A/parenleftBigr0
r/parenrightBig6/bracketleftbigg/parenleftBigr0
r/parenrightBig6
−2/bracketrightbigg
+Br6m
1+Cr12m
withmas a positive integer and A,B,C > 0. Here the second term is designed to produce
the desolvation granularity eﬀect.
24
(b)
CNH
C
OC
X1X2X3
CNH
C
OC(a)
1
2
C
CN
H
HO
NOC
CCNH
O
CC
N
CH
OC
CCNH
O
CC
N
CH
O
3(c)R
RRR
RC
N
HO
C
CCNH
OC
C
HNO
CC
N
CH
O C(i)X1(i)X2
(i)X3
X3(j)X2(j)X1(j)(e)(d)C
OCNH
CCOCNH
CCONH
C
OCNH
C
FIG. 1:
3 4 5 6 7
r [NH−−OC distance, angstrom]−3−1135UHb(r) [kcal/mol]
rHbcrHbsolrHb*
rHbxSol ang(a)H2O
NH NH OC OC
3 4 5 6 7
r [NH−−OC distance, angstrom]−3−1135UHb(r) [kcal/mol]
rLJ(xHb)(b)
rHbxLJ ang
FIG. 2:
25
0 200 400 600 800 1000
Temperature (oK)024Cv (10−2 kcal/mol oK)1: LJ fix
2: LJ ang
3: Sol fix
4: Sol ang(a)
1234
0 200 400 600 800 1000
Temperature (oK)024Cv (10−2 kcal/mol oK)1: LJ fix−Go
2: LJ ang−Go
3: Sol fix−Go
4: Sol ang(b)
1234
0 200 400 600 800 1000
Temperature (oK)012Cv(kcal/mol oK)1: LJ fix−Go
2: LJ ang−Go
3: Sol fix−Go
4: Sol ang
0 400 800oK012Cv (10−2 kcal/mol oK)LJ fix−Go
LJ fix−Go(c)
4
3
1,2
FIG. 3:
26
−25 0 25 50 75 100 0 0
Energy (kcal/mol)10−610−510−410−3
n(E)LJ fix−Go
LJ ang−Gounfoldedβ−
partially foldedsheet
(a)
−25 0 25 50 75 100 0 0
Energy (kcal/mol)10−710−610−510−410−310−2
n(E)Sol fix−Go
Sol angunfolded
β−partially folded
sheet(b)
FIG. 4:
−100 −50 0 50 100 150 200 250
Energy (kcal/mol)10−810−4
n(E)(a)
β−
sheetunfolded
partially
folded
dropletpartially
folded
droplet
0 500 1000
Temperature (oK)02Cv (10 kcal/moloK)
0 500 1000
Temperature (oK)−12−7−2<E> (102 kcal/mol)(b)
FIG. 5:
27
−100 −50 0 50
Energy (kcal/mol)10−1010−6n(E)(a)
β−
sheetunfolded
partially
fodled
droplet
0 1000 2000
Temperature (oK)01Cv (kcal/moloK)
0 1000
Temperature (oK)−2−1<E> (102 kcal/mol)(b)
−150 −100 −50 0 50
Energy (kcal/mol)10−1210−810−4
n(E)
0 1000
Temperature (oK)01Cv(kcal/moloK)(c)
β−
sheetunfoled
partially
folded
FIG. 6:
28
3 4 5
r [native NH−−OC distance, angstrom, T=25oC]−11357−kBT ln P(r) [kcal/mol]1: LJ fix−Go
2: Sol fix−Go
3: LJ ang−Go
4: Sol ang
12
4
3
FIG. 7:
29
3.1 3.3 3.5 3.7 3.9 4.1
r [native NH−−OC distance, angstrom, T=25oC]010203040506070−kBT ln P(r) [kcal/mol]1: LJ fix−Go
2: Sol fix−Go
3: LJ ang−Go
4: Sol ang(a)
1234
3.35 3.45 3.55
r1 [native NH−−OC distance of first block, angstrom]020P(r1)012P(r1)020P(r1)010P(r1)P(r1|r2<rHb*)
P(r1|r2>rHb*) LJ fix−Go
Sol fix−Go
LJ ang−Go
Sol ang(b)
−3 −2 −1 0
E1 [H−bond energy, kcal/mol]040040
P(E1|r2>rHb*)0510
P(E1|r2<rHb*)0510
Sol ang
Sol fix−Go
LJ ang−Go
LJ fix−GoP(E1)(c)
FIG. 8:
30
3.2 4.2 5.2 6.2
NH−−OC distance [angstrom, T=550oC]246810−kBT ln P(r) [kcal/mol](a)
1
2
3
45
12345 12345T= 0ps
T= 10ps
T= 100ps
T= 500ps(b)
FIG. 9:
