arXiv:cond-mat/0104440v1  [cond-mat.soft]  23 Apr 2001IL NUOVO CIMENTO Vol. 20D, N. 12bis 1998
A Study of Sequence Distributionof a Painted Globule as a Mod el
for Proteins with Good Folding Properties (∗)
M-T. Kechadi (1), R.G. Reilly (1), K.A. Dawson (2),
Yu.A. Kuznetsov (2),andE.G. Timoshenko (2)(∗∗)
(1)Department of Computer Science, University College Dublin , Belﬁeld, Dublin 4, Ire-
land.
(2)Department of Chemistry, University College Dublin, Belﬁe ld, Dublin 4, Ireland.
Summary. — In this paper we present a method to study the folding struct ure of
a simple model consisting of two kinds of monomers, hydropho bic and hydrophilic.
This method has three main steps: an eﬃcient simulation meth od to bring an open
sequence of homopolymer to a folded state, the application o f a painting method
calledregular hull to the folded globule and the refolding process of the obtain ed
copolymer sequence. This study allows us to suggest a theore tical function of dis-
order distribution for copolymer sequences that give rise t o a compacted and well
micro-phase separated globule.
PACS 07.05.T – Computer modeling and simulation.
PACS 36.20 – Proteins.
PACS 02.50.N – Monte Carlo method.
PACS 01.30.C – Conference proceedings.
1. – Introduction
Proteins are made up of elementary building blocks - 20 diﬀer ent amino acids. Once
synthesized, the protein chain folds into a unique 3-dimens ional shape, determined solely
by the amino acid primary structure. The equilibrium foldin g is a free energy minimiza-
tion process that depends on interactions among amino acids . Once folded, a protein
is usually a compact globule. The compactness of the globule is maintained by the hy-
drophobic eﬀect, so that the hydrophobic units are mainly lo cated inside the globule
and the hydrophilic ones on the surface. These hydrophilic u nits screen the hydrophobic
(∗)Paper presented at the International Conference on Morphol ogy and Kinetics of Phase
Separating Complex Fluids, Messina, Italy, June 24-28, 199 7. Published in: Il Nuovo
Cimento. Vol. 20D, No 12bis, pp. 2383-2391 (1998). Typos of the original publication
corrected by E.G.T.
(∗∗) E-mail: Edward.Timoshenko@ucd.ie. Web page: http://dar kstar.ucd.ie.
c/circlecopyrtSociet` a Italiana di Fisica 1
2 M-T. KECHADI, R.G. REILLY, K.A. DAWSON, YU.A. KUZNETSOV, andE.G. TIMOSHENKO
units thereby preventing aggregation in solution. Althoug h this phase separation feature
is well understood, biologists can neither accurately pred ict the folded protein shape
for a given primary sequence, nor which sequences will fold a nd be stable, rather than
aggregate.
In this paper we present a method to study the folding propert ies of a model of
proteins containing only two kinds of amino acids; hydropho bic and hydrophilic. This
model is referred to as the AB-model. The idea is to try to ﬁnd t he distribution of disorder
for copolymer sequences that give rise to a compact globule e xpressed as hydrophobic
core and hydrophilic exterior.
The study rests on two complementary methods, the painting m ethod and artiﬁcial
neural networks (ANN) method. The painting method is applie d to quite short sequences
and the ANN method to long sequences. The ﬁrst is necessary to train the ANN. In other
words the ANN needs the training process (which can be done by the painting method)
to study longer sequences which cannot be characterized by t he painting method. At
ﬁrst we only consider short sequences to prove the validity o f the painting method and
the applicability of windowing technique of ANN to the probl em of polymer collapse.
The paper is organized as follows: The next section describe s the model to study
the goodness of a sequence for the purposes of folding. The de scription of the method of
simulations used to collapse a homopolymer is given in secti on 3. The painting method
applied to a collapsed homopolymer globule is presented is s ection 4. Section 5 describes
a study of the distribution of disorder in sequences of a gene ric model of protein expressed
in terms of hydrophobic and hydrophilic units. This is done b y calculating the correlation
function of monomers along the chain. The choice of using the ANN method is also
discussed in the same section. We conclude in section 6.
2. – The Model
The model presented here rests mainly on the principle that w hen a protein folds it
turns into a globule, so that predominantly the hydrophobic units constitute the core of
the globule and the hydrophilic units the surface. We theref ore wish to create an ensemble
of condensed chains all of which possess a hydrophobic core a nd hydrophilic exterior with
ﬁxed sizes. Each chain sequence of this ensemble is then know n to possess at least one
acceptable folded state. To produce the painting structure of hydrophobic-hydrophilic
monomers we proceed in the following manner:
1. Consider an open sequence of a homopolymer of a ﬁxed size,
2. We perform numerical simulations based on the method desc ribed in the following
section to bring the system to its folded state.
3. The globule shape depends on the position of each monomer i n the sequence and
the interactions between them. This globule is not always co mpact. Testing the
compactness of the globule becomes necessary as only the sph erical globules are
considered.
4. The core of the globule is painted. The volume of the colore d core is deﬁned by
the hydrophobicity ratio along the chain. The painting tech nique is described in
section 4.
5. We can now ask if all the sequences, each of which has, a good folded state, can
be refolded from an open conformation to that state. Thus, th e obtained colored
A STUDY OF SEQUENCE DISTRIBUTION ETC. 3
Fig. 1. – Regular Hull painting method.
sequences are considered as an AB-model consisting of two ki nds of monomers A
and B. The Monte Carlo simulation method is again used for cop olymer sequences
to discriminate the good sequences from the bad ones. A seque nce is considered to
be good if it refolds eﬃciently and bad otherwise. The colore d sequences are also
used to train the ANN.
The primary concern in this paper is to identify any implied h ydrophilic-hydrophobic
correlations created by having a hydrophobic core structur e. Thus, we study the distri-
bution of the AB-model. A sequence of monomers of length N can be described by
the binary variables λ1,· · ·, λN. Without loss of generality we consider λi= +1 for hy-
drophilic and −1 for hydrophobic. Λ is a random variable and its probability distribution
function can be deduced from the averages Mkdeﬁned over the set {λm1,· · ·, λmk}. The
random variables λ1,· · ·, λNare mutually independent. The cumulant M2is given by
M2(m1, m2) =γm1m2=/an}bracketle{tλm1λm2/an}bracketri}ht − /an}bracketle{tλm1/an}bracketri}ht/an}bracketle{tλm2/an}bracketri}ht (1)
3. – Method of the Simulation
There are two approaches commonly used for computer simulat ions of polymer sys-
tems. One can proceed by straightforward numerical integra tion of, for example, the
Langevin equation [4], or Newton’s equation in the molecula r dynamics method. Alter-
natively, one can apply the method of Monte Carlo simulation [1, 2, 3]. The complete
description of the model and simulation methods is given in [ 5] based on the package
manycopdeveloped by Yu.A. Kuznetsov.
There are two obvious restrictions on the set of all possible updates or moves of
the system. Namely, we must ensure polymer connectivity, an d excluded volume. In a
continuous–space model one requires a calculation of all fo rces to ensure that excluded
volume is preserved, and there is an inner “space” loop in the Monte Carlo code. This
can be avoided in a model with a ﬁnite–size discrete space, si nce a look–up table is used
to manage this procedure. The dynamics can be performed by pe rmutations of monomer
and solvent beads on the lattice. We call such a permutation a n elementary move.
4 M-T. KECHADI, R.G. REILLY, K.A. DAWSON, YU.A. KUZNETSOV, andE.G. TIMOSHENKO
We consider a model of a copolymer consisting of only two diﬀe rent monomer types
distributed in a certain way along the chain. The total numbe r of each monomer type is
held ﬁxed for every conﬁguration in the ensemble. The chain s tructure does not change
under time evolution.
We work on a three-dimensional lattice with unit spacing. We restrict our model
by making the following particular choices of elementary mo ves. The maximum distance
between the nearest neighbors along the chain (NNC) is equal tormax=√
3. Thus,
for every bead the NNC are located in the nearest lattice site s along the vertices of the
lattice, or on second or third lattice neighbors. This condi tion provides for connectivity
of the chain. Furthermore, excluded volume is incorporated by ensuring that only NNC
are permitted in the nearest neighbor lattice sites, i. e. th e minimum distance between
beads is rmin= 1 for NNC beads (NNC cannot overlap), and rmin=√
2 otherwise.
The model discussed above is described by the Hamiltonian,
H=1
2/summationdisplay
i/negationslash=jw(rij)Isisj, (2)
where i,jenumerate lattice sites; silabels the state of site i,Isisjis a 3x3 symmetric
matrix and the matrix indices sitake three diﬀerent values, solvent sand monomer
types denoted as aandb. Here we denote rij=|ri−rj|. For short–range interactions
we take the weight function w(r) = 0, for r > R max, where Rmaxis some range of
interaction. As in Ref. [5] we choose w(1) = 1, w(√
2) = 1, w(√
3) = 0 .7,w(2) = 1 /2
andw(r) = 0 for r >2. Thus, the range of interaction includes the nearest and se cond–
nearest neighbors. We have used the Metropolis algorithm [1 , 2, 3] for calculation of the
transition probability in a system at temperature T.
Copolymers can be described by three independent Flory para meters:
χaa=2Isa− Iaa− Iss
kBT,
χbb=2Isb− Ibb− Iss
kBT, (3)
χab=Isa+Isb− Iab− Iss
kBT.
In fact, we shall consider only a special cut of parameter spa ce with the condition,
Iaa+Ibb= 2Iab. We can therefore reduce the number of parameters to two via t he
relation, χab= (χaa+χbb)/2. We further restrict our model by assuming that the
a–monomers are hydrophilic, χaa= 0.
4. – Method of Painting
The painting method was used to identify the two types of mono mer - hydrophobic
and hydrophilic. For a given hydrophobicity percentage the method consists in coloring
the interior of the globule with a radius corresponding to th e hydrophobicity ratio τb.
For this we consider that the globule is spherical with radiu s (Rg±δr) with δr< ǫr,
where ǫris the maximum value, and is called parameter of compactness .
There are diﬀerent ways to implement the painting procedure , depending on the
constraints to be satisﬁed. For example, if the globule is co nsidered a sphere, the easiest
way is to mark hydrophobic all the monomers in a ﬁxed radius Rbwhich corresponds
A STUDY OF SEQUENCE DISTRIBUTION ETC. 5
-0.1-0.0500.050.10.150.20.250.30.35
0 20 40 60 80 100 120
m✲γm✻
Fig. 2. – Correlation function γm=1
N−m/summationtext
nγn,n+mforτb= 10% and sequence length N=
120 (circles). The theoretical g(m) plot (solid curve) corresponds to A= 0.07,ξ= 37±5,
d= 23.6±0.4 and φ= 90.
to the given amount of hydrophobicity. Rbis called the hydrophobic radius and the
diﬀerence ( Rg−Rb) is the depth of painting.
Another method consists in bringing the centre of mass of the globule to the origin
of a 3-D Cartesian grid. Calculate the coordinates of the hyd rophobic radius along the 3
axes (x, y, z). This method is quicker than the ﬁrst; marking p rocess consists of a simple
coordinate test for each unit compared to those in the radius of hydrophobicity.
The advantage of these two methods is their simple implement ation. However the
constraint imposed on the form of the globule is very restric tive, especially for short
sequences, since: 1) a collapsed globule is never a perfect s phere and 2) the coordinates
of monomers in the lattice are integers. These approximatio ns cause anomalies in the
ﬁnal form of the globule.
The method of painting we have chosen involves the regular hull . It consists of
deﬁning an internal volume of the same form as that of the glob ule. The method proceeds
in two phases: 1) determining the units which constitute the surface of the globule
Γg={u0, u1,· · ·, un}. 2) For each ui∈Γgits distance is calculated from the centre of
mass of the globule Rui. The depth of painting ∆ is ﬁxed, the distance separating a
unitvjof a contour in the internal volume Γ p={v0, v1,· · ·, vm}from the centre of mass
is given by the equation ∆ = Rui−Rvj, so the line [ ui, vj] passes through the centre
of mass. The hydrophobic units are therefore delimited by Γ p. Figure 1 illustrates this
6 M-T. KECHADI, R.G. REILLY, K.A. DAWSON, YU.A. KUZNETSOV, andE.G. TIMOSHENKO
-0.2-0.100.10.20.30.40.50.60.7
0 20 40 60 80 100 120
m✲γm✻
Fig. 3. – Correlation function for τb= 25% and sequence length N= 120. The g(m) plot
corresponds to A= 0.17,ξ= 45±6,d= 22.4±0.3 and φ= 90.
procedure. Note that as we are working on a lattice, the unit ui∈Γgcorresponding to
vjis chosen in such a way so as to guarantee the painting depth di stance.
5. – Simulations
We performed Monte Carlo simulations of systems without rep tation for both folding
and refolding processes. The simulations were run on workst ations (DEC Alpha 3100
and SGI R10000). The method has two important steps which are very time consuming -
Monte Carlo simulations and neural network windowing metho d. For each Monte Carlo
simulation run more than N2sweeps were carried out, which requires approximately N2
seconds on the underlined machines. For N= 120, 4 hours CPU time required to bring
the initial sequence to folding state. Due to the enormous am ount of time needed to
simulate sequences of diﬀerent size, we only ran simulation s forN= 120 ,250,and 400.
For each ﬁgure, we plotted both the simulation results and a t heoretical function
that approximates these results. This function is given by
g(m) =A×exp(−m
ξ)sin(2πm
d+φ) (4)
where A, ξ, d , andφare ﬁtting parameters. Here Ais the (uninteresting) normalisa-
tion constant, ξis the correlation length, dis the period of periodicity and φis a phase
A STUDY OF SEQUENCE DISTRIBUTION ETC. 7
shift.
Figures 2,3,4 and 5 plot the correlation function obtained b y using more than 2,500
diﬀerent sequences of length 120 chosen randomly from an ens emble of 25,000. The
only diﬀerence between these 4 experiments is the hydrophob icity ratio. We distinguish
three diﬀerent regions in each graph. 1) initial region: the results are aﬀected by two
phenomena - the discretisation of the simulation space onto a lattice and the eﬀect of
painting which will be considered later. 2) the central regi on: results are stable and
coincide with equation 4. 3) Final region: this is character ized by a lack of correlations.
Since the chains are open the ends tend to be more hydrophilic , clearly shown in ﬁgure
5.
5.1.The Eﬀect of Painting . – The oscillations and their amplitudes are controlled by
the parameters ξandArespectively, and dcontrols the period. These three parameters
depend on the hydrophobicity ratio τb, and the sequence length N. We have determined
the function corresponding to each parameter, as well as the ir physical relation to the
painting method applied to folded sequences. In what follow s we analyze the results of
the painting method and demonstrate its limitations.
In a statistically signiﬁcant way, it was shown that the amin o acid sequences in
proteins diﬀer from what is expected from random sequences. The results of this study
based upon real protein sequences in the SWISS-PROT data bas e can be found in [7, 8].
Our study conﬁrm the non-random distribution of hydrophobi c-hydrophilic monomers
along the chain, and indicate that part of that correlation m ay be due to an implied
geometry of the condensed globule.
It is well known that the folding process brings residues geo metrically close together
which are also close along the chain. These residues are clas siﬁed as domains. The
current painting method does not take domains into account. Quite interesting results
for the monomer structure of folded sequences are obtained a pplying the method to
short sequences with an appropriate hydrophobicity ratio ( Figure 3). In the case shown
in ﬁgure 3 the domain structure does not get overwhelmed by th e large globule volumes.
When the domain structure is very small with respect to the gl obule volume only
those monomers at the border of the two volumes (global and hy drophobic) are considered
(see Figure 6). This border is negligible compared to the res t of the globule. It is vital
to take the domain structure into account to extend the paint ing method beyond the
globule core.
5.2.Improvement . – To overcome the limitations of the preceding method we mus t
therefore take the domain structure into account. We procee d as follows:
1. let τandNbe the hydrophobicity ratio and the sequence length respect ively.
2. choose a point P0belonging to the globule such that the distance from P0to the
surface of the globule is bigger than τ.
3. mark the monomers belonging to the volume of radius τand centre P0, and derive
the characteristics of the folding structure of the monomer s (using the correlation
function).
4. repeat steps 2 and 3 with a new point until all possible poin ts have been chosen.
5. calculate the total correlation function from the preced ing ones.
8 M-T. KECHADI, R.G. REILLY, K.A. DAWSON, YU.A. KUZNETSOV, andE.G. TIMOSHENKO
-0.200.20.40.60.81
0 20 40 60 80 100 120
m✲γm✻
Fig. 4. – Correlation function for τb= 50% and sequence length N= 120. The g(m) plot
corresponds to A= 0.13,ξ= 69±11,d= 21.4±0.2 and φ= 90.
A STUDY OF SEQUENCE DISTRIBUTION ETC. 9
-0.100.10.20.30.40.50.60.7
0 20 40 60 80 100 120
m✲γm✻
Fig. 5. – Correlation function for τb= 75% and sequence length N= 120. The g(m) plot
corresponds to A= 0.04,ξ= 77±25,d= 21.7±0.3 and φ= 90. Note that in this ﬁgure the
quality of ﬁtting is the worst due to the deep level of paintin g.
This new technique allows the analysis of the monomer foldin g structure for each
domain structure in the whole globule. However it is very tim e consuming, since all
points which satisfy the hydrophobicity radius τmust be examined. The method uses
the same exploration procedure as the neural network window ing method.
5.3.Neural Network . – Artiﬁcial neural networks are usually used to ﬁnd an ap-
proximate solution to a precisely (or an imprecisely) formu lated problem. ANNs are
characterized by the network topology, the connection weig ht between pairs of nodes,
node properties, and the deﬁnition of updating rules. Usual ly, an objective function is
deﬁned that represents the complete state of the network, an d its set of minima corre-
spond to diﬀerent stable states of the network. Learning in a n ANN, whether supervised
or unsupervised, is accomplished by adjusting the weights b etween connections in re-
sponse to new inputs or training patterns.
The advantage of the neural network approach is that it allow s us to generalize our
predictions about the compactness of folded proteins beyon d the sequences used to train
the network. The results of the neural network method are ful ly described in [6].
10 M-T. KECHADI, R.G. REILLY, K.A. DAWSON, YU.A. KUZNETSOV, andE.G. TIMOSHENKO
Fig. 6. – This ﬁgure shows the monomers belonging to the borde r between the two volumes.
This border becomes negligible as the length of the chain inc rease.
6. – Conclusion
In this paper a method to create geometrical objects with pro tein-like structure
and thereby generate sequences is suggested. This techniqu e used two complementary
methods - painting method and neural network windowing meth od. The ﬁrst one is
suitable to the short sequences. As opposed to the painting m ethod the ANN windowing
method has non-local eﬀect in the folding process (length of sequences, etc.). However,
a learning process is needed in order to predict the goodness of folded structure for any
sequence length.
We deduce that there are implied chain sequence correlation s indicating a sort of
block-like structure to the hydrophobic-hydrophilic stru cture. We see from the ﬁtting
of the experimental function γmby the theoretical one g(m) that increasing the depth
of painting increases the correlation length ξ, while it has practically no eﬀect on the
periodicity dor phase φ. The periodicity dis believed to be related to the size of the
globule while the phase φto the actual procedure involved and thus both are independe nt
of the painting depth.
The method presented here is very time consuming especially the Monte Carlo sim-
ulation and neural network steps. The performance of these m ethods can be improved
by using high performance and eﬃcient parallelization tech niques.
∗ ∗ ∗
The authors acknowledge interesting discussions with Dr A. V. Gorelov who was
ﬁrst to experimentally propose the idea of a painted globule back in 1994 and to Stephen
Connolly who performed an undergraduate project with one of us (E.G.T.) in 1995,
during the course of which the correlation functions of pain ted globule were ﬁrst though
yet fairly inaccurately determined from Monte Carlo simula tion.
A STUDY OF SEQUENCE DISTRIBUTION ETC. 11
REFERENCES
[1] K. Binder, Ed., Monte Carlo Methods in Statistical Physics, 2nd ed., Spring er–Verlag,
Berlin (1986) .
[2] K. Binder, Ed., Applications of Monte Carlo Method in Statistical Physics, 2nd ed.,
Springer–Verlag, Berlin (1987) .
[3] M.P. Allen, D.J. Tildesley, Computer Simulations of Liquids, Clarendon Press, Oxford
(1987) .
[4] A. Byrne, P. Kiernan, D. Green, K.A. Dawson, J. Chem. Phys. ,102(1995) 573.
[5] Yu. A. Kuznetsov, E. G. Timoshenko, K. A. Dawson, J. Chem. Phys. ,103(1995) 4807.
[6] R.G. Reilly, Kechadi M-T., K.A. Dawson, Yu. A. Kuznetsov and E.G. Timoshenko, Il
Nuovo Cimento. ,20D (12bis) (1998) 2565.
[7] A. Irback, C. Peterson and F. Potthast, Physical Review E ,55(1997) 860.
[8] A. Bairoch and B. Boeckmann, Nucleic Acids Res. ,22(1994) 3578.
