arXiv:math/0211111v1  [math.AP]  6 Nov 2002CONTROL OF SPATIALLY HETEROGENEOUS AND
TIME-VARYING CELLULAR REACTION NETWORKS: A NEW
SUMMATION LAW
MARK A. PELETIER, HANS V. WESTERHOFF, AND BORIS N. KHOLODENK O
Abstract. A hallmark of a plethora of intracellular signaling pathway s is the
spatial separation of activation and deactivation process es that potentially re-
sults in precipitous gradients of activated proteins. The c lassical Metabolic
Control Analysis (MCA), which quantiﬁes the inﬂuence of an i ndividual pro-
cess on a system variable as the control coeﬃcient, cannot be applied to spa-
tially separated protein networks. The present paper unrav els the principles
that govern the control over the ﬂuxes and intermediate conc entrations in spa-
tially heterogeneous reaction networks. Our main results a re two types of the
control summation theorems. The ﬁrst type is a non-trivial g eneralization of
the classical theorems to systems with spatially and tempor ally varying con-
centrations. In this generalization, the process of diﬀusi on, which enters as the
result of spatial concentration gradients, plays a role sim ilar to other processes
such as chemical reactions and membrane transport. The seco nd summation
theorem is completely novel. It states that the control by th e membrane trans-
port, the diﬀusion control coeﬃcient multiplied by two, and a newly introduced
control coeﬃcient associated with changes in the spatial si ze of a system (e.g.,
cell), all add up to one and zero for the control over ﬂux and co ncentration.
Using a simple example of a kinase/phosphatase system in a sp herical cell, we
speculate that unless active mechanisms of intracellular t ransport are involved,
the threshold cell size is limited by the diﬀusion control, w hen it is beginning
to exceed the spatial control coeﬃcient signiﬁcantly.
1.Introduction
Extracellular information received by plasma membrane receptors is processed,
encoded, and transferred to the nucleus through activation and spatial relocation of
multiple signalling components. Receptor activation triggers signalling responses
associated with the mobilization of a plethora of adapter and target proteins to
the plasma membrane (Haugh and Lauﬀenburger 1997; Kholodenko et al. 2000b).
Proteins activated e.g. by phosphorylation at the cell surface tra vel to stimulate
critical regulatory targets at various cellular sites including the nuc leus. During
and after the travel, these proteins are inactivated, e.g. throug h dephosphorylation.
For instance, a protein phosphorylated by a plasma-membrane ass ociated protein
kinase can be dephosphorylated by a phosphatase in the cytosol o r nucleus. The
transport between cellular locations, where the activation and inac tivation occur,
is passive (thermal diﬀusion), driven by spatial gradients in the con centrations.
In some cases, not to be discussed here, motor proteins or endoc ytosis may be
involved (Kholodenko 2002). Previous work estimated that these s patial gradients
Centrum voor Wiskunde en Informatica, Amsterdam, The Nethe rlands;peletier@cwi.nl
Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, The Netherlands; hw@bio.vu.nl
Thomas Jeﬀerson University, Philadelphia, USA; Boris.Kholodenko@mail.tju.ed .
1
2 MARK A. PELETIER, HANS V. WESTERHOFF, AND BORIS N. KHOLODEN KO
may be large, and that therefore diﬀusion may contribute to the co ntrol of signal
transduction (Brown and Kholodenko 1999; Kholodenko et al. 2000 a).
For spatially homogeneous reaction networks, the control over ﬂ uxes and in-
termediate concentrations has been studied both experimentally a nd theoretically
(reviewed in (Fell 1997)). The control is generally quantiﬁed as the extent to which
any type of molecular process inﬂuences a system variable, such as the ﬂux or
concentration. The control coeﬃcients are deﬁned as the ratios of the fractional
changes in the system variable to that of the biochemical activity wh ich caused the
system change. Mathematically, the stability of a system steady st ate is required
and the changes are considered as inﬁnitesimally small, i.e., the coeﬃcie nts are ex-
pressedasthe logtologderivatives(Fell 1997). Importantprincip lesunderlyingthe
control of biochemical reaction networks in well-stirred reactors have been worked
out recently. For instance, it can be shown that a large increase in t he activity of
a single enzyme does not result in a substantial increase in the ﬂux fo r almost any
metabolic network; marked ﬂux increase can be achieved by a conce rted modula-
tion of several pathway reactions (Kacser and Acerenza 1993). In metabolic control
analysis (MCA), this result is related to the so-called summation theo rem, which
states that the sum of the enzyme control coeﬃcients adds up to 1 (Kacser and
Burns 1973; Heinrich and Rapoport 1973; Westerhoﬀ and van Dam 1 987). There
is no rate-limiting enzyme, the control is shared between all networ k processes.
The present paper unravels the principles that govern the contro l pattern in spa-
tially heterogeneous cellular networks. We demonstrate new prope rties of control
thatresultfromthespatialaspectofdiﬀusionandseparationofs ignallingreactions.
The control summation theorems, relevant for these networks, are formulated and
proven.
2.Methods
2.1.Description of the system. Weconsiderlivingmetabolic systemsconsisting
ofninternal chemical species Y1,...,Y n, with concentrations c1,...,c n. These
species interact via mreactions which can be represented as
n/summationdisplay
i=1N+
ijYi⇄n/summationdisplay
i=1N−
ijYi, j= 1,...,m (1)
whereN±
ijare the dimensionless forward and reverse stoichiometric coeﬃcien ts
for the consumption of species Yiin the forward and reverse reactions j. We
writeNij=N−
ij−N+
ijfor the net stoichiometric component. Reaction jhas
rateαvjvj(c1,...,c n), so that in the absence of diﬀusion the time evolution of the
concentrations cishould be given by
∂
∂tci=m/summationdisplay
j=1Nijαvjvj, i= 1,...,n.
cihas the dimension of concentration [M], or mole number per unit volume . The
rateofthereaction1,i.e. vj, hasthedimensionofconcentrationperunit time[M/s].
It is a function of the kinetic parameters of the enzyme catalyzing t hat reaction (or
if non-enzymatic of the chemical reaction itself), e.g. KM, the concentration of the
enzyme, and the concentrations of substrates, products and a llosteric modiﬁers of
the reaction. The dimensionless parameter αvjis the tool we shall use to modulate
the activity of reaction vj.
CONTROL OF HETEROGENEOUS NETWORKS 3
In this paper we will be interested in cases in which concentrations ca nnotbe
assumed homogeneous in space inside the systems. For thermodyn amic reasons,
living systems need to be open for at least some chemical compounds . These sub-
stancesare transported acrossthe system membrane, usually b y transportproteins,
i.e. eﬀectively there is a sink or source for some of the species on the system bound-
ary, e.g. the (plasma) membrane. The spatial separation between the sink or source
and the chemistry that takes place in the bulk phase then creates s patial variations
in concentration.
When the system is not homogeneousand not at steadystate, the concentrations
needtobespeciﬁedasfunctionsoftimeandspace(i.e. ci(x,t)), andboundaryﬂuxes
arerequired. Theprincipaldiﬃcultyaccompanyingthespatialinhom ogeneityofthe
concentrations of any component Yi, which makes the classical MCA inapplicable,
is that the number of ‘explicit’ variables associated with Yibecomes inﬁnitely large.
Thereactionsareassumedtotake placein anenclosedthree-dimen sionalspacethat
is represented by a bounded set of x1,x2,x3-coordinates, i.e. the volume V⊂R3.
For instance, Vcan correspond to the cytoplasm or the mitochondrial matrix.
InsideVthe species react with each other, according to Eq. 1; in addition th ey
undergo diﬀusive transport. The concentrations ciof the species are functions of
time (0< t < t end) and space ( x∈V), and their evolution is governed by the
balance (reaction-diﬀusion) equations (Katchalsky and Curran 19 65)
∂
∂tci−αDiDi∆ci=m/summationdisplay
j=1Nijαvjvj, x∈V,0< t < t end. (2)
The parameter Diis the diﬀusion coeﬃcient of species Yi. It is considered homo-
geneous. For Cartesian coordinates the Laplacian ∆ is deﬁned as
∆ =∂2
∂x2
1+∂2
∂x2
2+∂2
∂x2
3.
The operator ∆ has the dimension of 1 /length2[m−2].Dihas the dimension of
surface per time [m2/s] and is assumed to be the same throughout volume V. In
order to assess the importance of diﬀusion of a substance for the behavior of the
system, we shall modulate the diﬀusion processes. To this aim, Diis multiplied
by the dimensionless modulation parameter αDi, which has the value of 1 in the
reference state.
In addition to Eq. 2, which holds in the bulk, represented by V, we need to
specify the behaviour at the boundary Sof the set V. For a species Yifor which
the membrane is a passive barrier we assume a closed boundary cond ition,
−αDiDi∂ci
∂ν= 0 on S. (3)
The vector νis the normal vector of unit length pointing out of V, and∂ci/∂νis
the derivative of ciin the direction of ν. This makes the quantity −αDiDi∂ci/∂ν
the outward diﬀusive ﬂux of species Yi.
Ifaspecies istransportedacrossthe boundaryof V, then the boundarycondition
takes a similar form, but with non-zero right-hand side,
−αDiDi∂ci
∂ν=αfifionS, (4)
wherefiisthetransportrateperunit surfacearea. ficanbeduetoactivetransport
or a (bio)chemical reaction at the membrane surface and may be a f unction of the
4 MARK A. PELETIER, HANS V. WESTERHOFF, AND BORIS N. KHOLODEN KO
concentrations c1,...,c n. There is at least one non-zero ﬂux αfifi(one of which
we conveniently assume to correspond to i= 1). Like other α’s,αfiis a parameter
that we shall use to modulate the transport activity. This modulatio n is equivalent
to changes in the activity or concentration of membrane enzymes o r carriers. We
shall refer to the ‘ﬂux Jthrough the system’ as the magnitude of the net export of
Y1, integrated over the surface of Vand normalized by the surface area:
J=αf1
|S|/integraldisplay
Sf1dS (5)
We normalizethe total ﬂowwith respectto the correspondingsurf aceareato obtain
a surface-averaged ﬂux. The diﬀerence in role of a reaction rate in the bulk phase
(vj) and a transportrate ( fi) is underlined by the diﬀerence in the dimensionality—
the former is given in volume concentration per time unit (e.g., M/s), w hereas the
latter is expressed in surface concentration (density) per time un it (e.g., M ·m/s).
We comprise Eq. 3 into Eq. 4 by allowing fito be zero. Some reactions that involve
cytoplasmic substances only occur in the membrane or at the membr ane surface.
This is equivalent to the substrate of the reaction being exported a nd the product
of the reaction being imported, and will be treated as such.
2.2.Parameter Modulation and Control Analysis. We have explicitly intro-
duced dimensionless modulation parameters αvj,αDi, andαfi, through which the
system can be modiﬁed. For the formulation and interpretation of c ontrol theorems
associated with diﬀusion we need to introduce two additional forms o f modulation,
associated with space and time, in the following way. We assume that t he spa-
tial and temporal variables x1,x2,x3, andt, are related to a reference spatial and
temporal frame ξ1,ξ2,ξ3, andτ, via dimensionless modulation parameters αLand
αt:
x1=αLξ1, x 2=αLξ2, x 3=αLξ3,andt=αtτ.(6)
Note that a reference time interval [0 ,τend] is rescaled to an actual time interval
[0,αtτend] =αt[0,τend]; and similarly, the reference volume Vis scaled to an actual
volumeαLV(Figure 1).
V
αLV
Figure 1. The domain Vis scaled by geometric multiplication
We shall be explicit about the cause-and-eﬀect relationship that ex ists between
parameters andstate. The parameters are the kinetic constants in rate functions vj
andfiand diﬀusion coeﬃcients Di, together with their modulators αvj,αDi, and
αfi. We also consider the volume Vand the time interval [0 ,τend] as parameters,
together with the space and time modulators αLandαt. A ﬁnal ‘parameter’ that
CONTROL OF HETEROGENEOUS NETWORKS 5
we need to take into account is the distribution of all species in space at the initial
time.
For a given choice of all parameters the concentration of each of t he species Yi
is determined uniquely as a function of space and time, according to E qs. 2 and 4.
The choice of parameters yields a a unique set of functions ci(x,t), each deﬁned at
every point x∈αLVand at each time t∈[0,αtτend].
Note that the functions ciare deﬁned on diﬀerent domains for diﬀerent αLand
αt. Forcomparisonpurposes it will be more convenientto think of cias functions of
the reference coordinates ξandτand the modulation parameters α, i.e.ci(ξ,τ,α),
whereξ∈V,τ∈[0,τend], andα= (αvj,αDi,αfi,αL,αt). The functions ci(ξ,τ,α)
determine the stateof the system associated with the choice of parameters.
The change of coordinates, from ( x,t) to (ξ,τ), induces a small modiﬁcation in
Eqs. 2 and 4, which now become
α−1
t∂
∂τci−α−2
LαDiDi∆ci=m/summationdisplay
j=1Nijαvjvj, ξ∈V,0< τ < τ end(7)
−α−1
LαDiDi∂ci
∂ν=αfifi ξ∈S,0< τ < τ end(8)
Note that the diﬀerentiation in the operators ∆ and ∂/∂νis now with respect
toξ. The deﬁnition of the ﬂux, however, remains unchanged under this change of
coordinates, because of the surface averaging:
J=αf1
|S|/integraldisplay
Sf1dS (9)
In the vein of Metabolic Control Analysis we will consider a reference state
associated with the choice αvj=αDi=αfi=αL=αt= 1 and a second state,
resulting from an inﬁnitesimal change in one of these modulators. Th e diﬀerence
between the two states will be taken to characterize the control that the modulated
parameter has on the state of the system. The dimensionless para meterαvjis
the tool we shall use to modulate the activity of reaction vj. Departures of αvj
from 1 correspond to a modulation of enzyme catalytic activity or co ncentration,
or to a proportional modulation of all rate constants of the react ion step if it is not
enzyme catalyzed (this modulation leaves the equilibrium constant un changed, for
details see (Kholodenko and Westerhoﬀ 1993, 1994, 1995), where this approach was
introduced). For instance, if reaction 1 is a protein-protein intera ction (a central
reaction in signaling networks), the rate vjdepends on two kinetic constants, kon
andkoﬀ, and a change in αvjcorresponds to equal proportional change of both
constants that leaves the dissociation (equilibrium) constant Kdunchanged. The
ratio of the fractional change in a state variable of the reaction ne twork, such as
Jorck, and the fractional change in αvjdetermines the control coeﬃcient with
respect to reaction rate vj(in the limit of inﬁnitesimally small changes):
CJ
vj=dlnJ
dlnαvj/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
αvj=1, Cckvj=dlnck
dlnαvj/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle/vextendsingle
αvj=1,
whereαvj= 1 corresponds to the reference state (all other parameters a re assumed
ﬁxed). Similarly, considering two states corresponding to small mod ulations in di-
mensionless parameters, αfiandαDi, we deﬁne the control coeﬃcients with respect
to transport reaction and diﬀusion, CJ
fiandCJ
Di.
6 MARK A. PELETIER, HANS V. WESTERHOFF, AND BORIS N. KHOLODEN KO
An intrinsically novel control coeﬃcient emerges as the heterogen eous spatial
organization of cellular reaction network is taken into account. This coeﬃcient is
obtained when the size ( L) of the system is modiﬁed through a modulation of the
dimensionless parameter αL, as shown schematically in Fig. 1, whilst keeping ﬁxed
allother parameters. In a cell setting, these parametersinclude the volumeand sur-
face concentrations of enzymes and other molecular forms, the t otal concentrations
of which are conserved (for instance, the total amount of phosp horylated and un-
phosphorylated forms of a protein) in network reactions describe d by Eqs. 7 and 8.
Therefore, increasing the cell size also implies adding conserved che mical moieties
and additional enzymes both to the bulk aqueous phase and cell mem branes. Ac-
cordingly, the ‘spatial’ control coeﬃcient is deﬁned as CJ
L=dlnJ/dlnαL, where
only the spatial variables are modulated, as described above (Eq. 6 ). It is of note,
that the parameter Lcan be interpreted as the characteristic cell size, e.g., the vol-
ume to surface ratio, whose fractional changes are equal to the fractional changes
inαL.
AspecialcaseofEq.7ariseswhenweonlyconsidersteady-state, non-equilibrium
conﬁgurations; these correspond to solutions c1(ξ),...,c n(ξ) of the steady-state
equations
−α−2
LαDiDi∆ci=m/summationdisplay
j=1Nijαvjvj, ξ∈V, (10)
withboundaryconditions8. Forthepurposesofthispaperweassu methatsolutions
of this set of equations are locally unique and asymptotically stable.
3.Results: the first summation theorem
In a metabolic network where concentrations are homogeneous, t he sum of the
ﬂux control by all biochemical reactions equals 1 (Kacser and Burn s 1973; Heinrich
and Rapoport 1973). We generalize this summation theorem for sys tems where
concentrations may not be homogeneous and where transport oc curs — here the
sum over all the reactive processes need not be 1. The ﬂux may be p artially
controlled by diﬀusion or by transport and it is because of this contr ol that the
classical summation theorem no longer holds. The generalized summa tion theorem
takes the form
n/summationdisplay
i=1CJ
Di+m/summationdisplay
j=1CJ
vj+n/summationdisplay
i=1CJ
fi= 1. (11)
In words this theorem reads: the total control by all diﬀusion, re action, and trans-
port processes on any steady state ﬂux equals 1. The proof of Eq . 11 is based on
Euler’s theorem on homogeneous function, which can be stated as f ollows. Let g
be a function of p1,...,p n, such that for all piand for all λ >0,
g(λβ1p1,...,λβnpn) =λγg(p1,...,p n), (12)
for some β1,...,β n,γ∈R, i.e.,g(p1,...,p n) is the same function after the trans-
formation
˜g=λγg,˜pi=λβipi. (13)
Then
n/summationdisplay
i=1βi∂ln|g|
∂lnpi=γ. (14)
CONTROL OF HETEROGENEOUS NETWORKS 7
It may be noted that for some of the parameters pi,βimay equal zero. These
parameters are not modulated in Eq. 13, and Eq. 14 shows that the se parameters
are absent from the summation theorem.
Forγandallβiequalto 1, Eq.14remindsofthe ﬂux controlsummation theorem
of Metabolic Control Analysis (Kacser and Burns 1973; Heinrich and Rapoport
1973), but it may not be clear a prioriwhat function and which parameters should
be considered. When searching for other than the traditional sum mation theorems,
a strategy may prove useful. One strategy is that of leaving the sy stem in essence
in the same state (cf. (Kacser and Burns 1973)). In terms of the system under
consideration this translates into the concentrations ci(ξ,τ) remaining the same
when the parameters piof Eq. 13 are changed.
In order to implement the above strategy and examine under what t ype of pa-
rameter changes ci(ξ,τ) might be constant, one may inspect the equations that
deﬁneci. For steady states Eqs. 10 and 8 deﬁne ci(ξ). Multiplying both equa-
tions by the same factor λshould leave their solutions unchanged. Consequently,
multiplying all αDi, allαvj, and all αfiby that same factor should not change
the solutions ci(ξ) either: the terms in the equations are homogeneous functions of
ﬁrst order of the parameters αDi,αvj, andαfi. When only these parameters are
modulated, the speciﬁc transport rate remains unaltered, becau se the metabolite
concentrations remain constant and neither αDi,αvj, orαfioccurs in the function
fi(c1,...,c n). Consequently firemains unchanged, and therefore we can calculate
the corresponding ﬂux as a function of λ,
J(λ) =λαf1
|S|/integraldisplay
Sf1=λJ(1).
We can reformulate this result as follows: we have shown that the ﬂu xJ, as a
function of the parameters αDi,αvj, andαfi, satisﬁes
J(λαD1,...,λα Dn,λαv1,...,λα vm,λαf1,...,λα fn)
=λJ(αD1,...,α Dn,αv1,...,α vm,αf1,...,α fn).
Equality 11 now follows from Eq. 14.
It should be remembered that the parameters αDi,αvj, andαfirepresentthe ac-
tivities of diﬀusion, chemical, and transport processes, respectiv ely. Consequently,
Eq. 11 really refers to a theorem concerning the control by diﬀusio n, chemistry and
transport. It is an extension, both in concept and in proof, of the familiar ﬂux con-
trol summation theorem of Metabolic Control Analysis. The latter o nly dealt with
the middle terms of the left-hand side and then only the enzyme cata lyzed reac-
tions thereof, it assumed concentrations to be homogeneous in sp ace, and neglected
explicit transport terms.
A further extension to the above methodology will generalize the ab ove sum-
mation theorem to systems that depend on time: Dropping the assu mption of
steady state, Eqs. 7 and 8 become the equations that deﬁne ci(ξ,τ). Multiplying
both these equations by the same factor λagain leaves their solutions unchanged.
Consequently:
−CJ(τ)
t+n/summationdisplay
i=1CJ(τ)
Di+m/summationdisplay
j=1CJ(τ)
vj+n/summationdisplay
i=1CJ(τ)
fi= 1. (15)
8 MARK A. PELETIER, HANS V. WESTERHOFF, AND BORIS N. KHOLODEN KO
HereCJ(τ)
tcoincides with the time-control coeﬃcient deﬁned in (Acerenza et a l.
1989). How can we understand this theorem and in particularthis ne w time-control
coeﬃcient? Let us ﬁrstconsiderthe situation that would ensue fro msimultaneously
and equally increasing all the parameters αDi,αvj, andαfiby 1% in the absence
of an increase in αt. Because all activities increase, also the ﬂux Jshould increase.
However, the system should also change more quickly in time, i.e. the in crease in
magnitude of Jshould occur earlier. To obtain a proportionate increase in J, one
should look at an earlier point in time, i.e. time should be 1% earlier, or, ke eping
in mind that t=αtT,αt= 0.99.
CJ(τ)
tshould not be confused with the time-dependent control coeﬃcien ts de-
ﬁned by (Westerhoﬀ and van Dam 1987; Heinrich and Reder 1991). F or a further
discussion of the distinctions, see also (Kholodenko et al. 1997) for the control
analysis of relaxations in the vicinity of the steady state.
Often, as time goes to inﬁnity, the system relaxes to a steady stat e. The control
by time on the ﬂux then reduces to zero and the summation theorem for the time
dependent controlcoeﬃcients reduces to the one for steady st ate controlcoeﬃcients
(Eq. 11).
The summation theorem 15 is more general than suggested by the a bove deriva-
tion. It can be derived without requiring explicit equations for the tim e evolution
of the system, such as Eqs. 7 and 8. The proof then considers an a ctual physical
transformationof the system under consideration: all the time de pendent elemental
processes are increased by the same factor λ. This implies that everything happens
in the same way, but faster by that same factor λ. We represent this concept of
‘faster’ by the parameter αt, as above (since t=αtτ,αt<1 correspondsto ‘faster’,
andαt>1 to ‘slower’). Writing the parameter-dependence explicitly,
ci(ξ,τ) =ci(ξ,τ;αDi,αvj,αfi,αL,αt),
we have
ci/parenleftBig
ξ,τ;λαDi,λαvj,λαfi,αL,αt
λ/parenrightBig
=ci(ξ,τ;αDi,αvj,αfi,αfi,αt),
or in other words, ciis homogeneous of zeroth order in αDi,αvj,αfi, and 1/αt.
Using Eq. 14 this yields the summation theorem for concentrations,
−Cck
t+n/summationdisplay
i=1Cck
Di+m/summationdisplay
j=1Cckvj+n/summationdisplay
i=1Cck
fi= 0. (16)
whereckis short for ck(ξ,τ). A similar result for the ﬂux,
J/parenleftBig
τ;λαDi,λαvj,λαfi,αt
λ/parenrightBig
=λJ(τ;αDi,αvj,αfi,αt),
showsthattheﬂuxishomogeneousofﬁrstorderin αDi,αvj,αfi, and1/αt, resulting
in the summation theorem Eq. 15.
4.A novel summation theorem
The above theorem is an extension of the theorem of (Acerenza et al. 1989) to
cases with transport and diﬀusion. The theorem we shall develop no w is intrinsi-
cally new as its origin lies in spatial aspects that have hitherto been ne glected in
CONTROL OF HETEROGENEOUS NETWORKS 9
Metabolic Control Analysis (Fell 1997). The strategy we follow is aga in to con-
sider a transformation for which the system properties should not change. We ﬁrst
discuss the nature of diﬀusion, as illustrated by Einstein’s diﬀusion eq uation:
δx=/radicalbig
nDDδt,
wherenDis a number of order 1 that depends on the dimensionality. In words,
the displacement due to diﬀusion increases with the square root of t he diﬀusion
coeﬃcient. Consequently, increasing all diﬀusion coeﬃcients by λ2should increase
all displacement by the factor λ.
This becomes obvious when considering Eq. 7. Replacing αDibyλ2αDiand
αLbyλαLleaves Eq. 7 unchanged. The boundary condition 8 in a natural way
suggests replacing αfibyλαfi, so that this equation is also essentially unchanged.
As a result this choice of parameters leaves the solution ciinvariant:
ci(ξ,τ;λ2αDi,αvj,λαfi,λαL,αt) =ci(ξ,τ;αDi,αvj,αfi,αL,αt).(17)
We immediately deduce the second summation theorem for concentr ations,
2n/summationdisplay
i=1Cc
Di+n/summationdisplay
i=1Cc
fi+Cc
L= 0, (18)
wherecstands for any ci(ξ,τ). Similarly, since the ﬂux satisﬁes
J(τ;λ2αDi,αvj,λαfi,λαL,αt) =λJ(τ;αDi,αvj,αfi,αL,αt),
the associated summation theorem results
2n/summationdisplay
i=1CJ(τ)
Di+n/summationdisplay
i=1CJ(τ)
fi+CJ(τ)
L= 1. (19)
Naturally, if we only consider steady states, then ci(ξ,τ) reduces to ci(ξ), andJ(τ)
toJ.
The modulation of V, viaαL, implicated in the evaluation of the corresponding
control coeﬃcient is one in which the size of the system changes; it is important,
however, that the system size changes whilst keeping the volume co ncentration of
enzymes in the bulk aqueous phase constant and the surface conc entrations of the
membrane enzymes constant.
Toillustratethemodulationintroducedabove,considerthecaseof aone-dimensional
spatial domain of the form (0 ,∞); the membrane is thought to be at x= 0, and
the cell is deemed so large that the ‘other end’ is eﬀectively at inﬁnity . For such a
‘half-inﬁnite’ cell, in non-equilibrium steady-state, Eq. 19 reduces t o
2n/summationdisplay
i=1CJ
Di+n/summationdisplay
i=1CJ
fi= 1 (20)
whereJis the ﬂux at the border ( x= 0);CJ
Lvanishes as a result of the inﬁnite
size. Figure 2 shows how the solution ci(x) depends on the parameter modulation
by the factor λgiven in Eq. 17. Note that here ciis plotted as a function of x;
when plotted as a function of ξ, the graphs for diﬀerent λcoincide (cf. 17).
10 MARK A. PELETIER, HANS V. WESTERHOFF, AND BORIS N. KHOLODE NKO
λ= 1c1:λ >1
c2:λ >1
Figure 2. The scaling in λfor a two-species system
ξ= 0 ξ=Lkinasephosphatase
Figure 3. Geometry 1: a slice bounded by parallel membranes
kinase
at the
membrane
phosphatase
in the bulk
Figure 4. Geometry 2: a spherical cell
5.An explicit example system
For certain simple cases control coeﬃcients can be calculated explic itly. We do
so here for a kinase/phosphatase example that we also discussed in (Brown and
Kholodenko 1999; Kholodenko et al. 2000a). There are two species ,YandYP,
which are the unphosphorylated and phosphorylated form of a give n protein; the
kinase converts YintoYP, and the phosphatase does the reverse.
Besides providing an illustration of the concepts and results discuss ed above we
wishtodemonstratetheinﬂuenceofthesystemgeometryonthec ontrolcoeﬃcients.
We consider two cases:
(1)Vis bounded by two parallel membranes; the kinase reaction is localized
to one membrane, the phosphatase to the other (Figure 3);
(2)Vis a spherical region (e.g. a cell or an organelle) bounded by a membra ne;
the kinase is localized at the membrane, but the phosphatase is distr ibuted
throughout the bulk (Figure 4).
CONTROL OF HETEROGENEOUS NETWORKS 11
Asweshallseebelow,inthecaseofparallelmembranesthesizecont rolcoeﬃcient
CJ
Lisnegative: an increase in the distance between the membranes reduces the ﬂ ux
through the system. However, when the phosphatase is not memb rane-bound but
distributed, as in the second case, increasing the system size actu ally increases the
ﬂux:CJ
Lispositive.
5.1.Two parallel membranes. We assume that the system is large with respect
to the distance Lbetween the membranes and therefore adopt a one-dimensional
formulation. We also restrict the study to (non-equilibrium) steady state.
Since no reaction takes place in the bulk, the equations satisﬁed by YandYP
in the bulk (Eq. 10) reduce to
−α−2
LαDDYP′′=−α−2
LαDDY′′= 0,0< ξ < L. (21)
Note that the spatial variable is ξ, as discussed above; the physical variable xis
given by x=αLξ.
For the kinase and phosphatase reactions we assume the rate fun ctions
αkkk(κkY−YP) and αpkp(YP−κpY).
Note the dimensionality of kk,p: the rate functions are surface ﬂuxes, but YPand
Yare bulk concentrations; kkandkptherefore have dimension length/time. The
coeﬃcients αk,pandκk,pare dimensionless.
The kinase and phosphatase reactions both enter the description as boundary
conditions (cf. 8):
α−1
LαDDYP′=αpkp(YP−κpY)
α−1
LαDDY′=−αpkp(YP−κpY)atξ= 0 (phosphatase) (22)
−α−1
LαDDYP′=−αkkk(κkY−YP)
−α−1
LαDDY′=αkkk(κkY−YP)atξ=L(kinase) (23)
Equation 21 implies that the spatial gradients of YPandY(i.e.YP′andY′)
are constant in ξ; let us set δ=YP′. From the solution of equations (21–23) the
relevant information for our purposes is δ:
δ=M(βpαkκk−βkαpκp)
α−1
LαDD(βk+βp)+Lβkβp. (24)
HereMis the total concentration Y+YP, which is independent of ξby Eq. 21,
and
βk=αkkk(1+κk) and βp=αpkp(1+κp).
Because of the spatial separation of the reactions the ﬂux as deﬁ ned by Eq. 5
equals the diﬀusive ﬂux,
J=−α−1
LαDDYP′=−α−1
LαDDδ. (25)
From Eqs. 24 and 25 we can determine the control coeﬃcients of th e ﬂux with
respect to the kinase and phosphatase reactions and to diﬀusion, as well as the
12 MARK A. PELETIER, HANS V. WESTERHOFF, AND BORIS N. KHOLODE NKO
‘length’-control coeﬃcient:1
CJ
k=Dβp
D(βk+βp)+Lβkβp,
CJ
p=Dβk
D(βk+βp)+Lβkβp,
CJ
D=Lβkβp
D(βk+βp)+Lβkβp,
CJ
L=−Lβkβp
D(βk+βp)+Lβkβp.
Clearly these expressions satisfy the summation theorems Eqs. 11 and 19:
CJ
D+CJ
k+CJ
p= 1,
2CJ
D+CJ
k+CJ
p+CJ
L= 1.
Note that both the kinase and the phosphatase reaction are boun dary eﬀects, and
therefore give rise to boundary control coeﬃcients CJ
fiof Eqs. 11 and 19.
For concentration control we choose to consider not a pointwise c oncentration,
but the diﬀerence between concentrations at opposite ends:
YP(L)−YP(0) =Lδ.
Denoting the control coeﬃcients with respect to this quantity as Cc, we have
Cc
k=Dβp
D(βk+βp)+Lβkβp,
Cc
p=Dβk
D(βk+βp)+Lβkβp,
Cc
D=−D(βk+βp)
D(βk+βp)+Lβkβp,
Cc
L=D(βk+βp)
D(βk+βp)+Lβkβp.
An example of the values of these control coeﬃcients is given in Figur e 5.
5.2.A spherical cell. For the second example we consider the same system as
above, but now in a spherical cell of radius L. We assume spherical symmetry
throughout.
The kinase reaction is again localized at the membrane, and therefor e results in
a boundary condition
−α−1
LαDDYP′=αkkk(YP−κkY),
−α−1
LαDDY′=−αkkk(YP−κkY),atξ=L(kinase). (26)
The spatial variable is again ξ, but it now represents a radialcoordinate. The
phosphatase reaction, which in this example is distributed througho ut the bulk,
now enters as a right-hand side in the diﬀerential equation for YandYP(cf. 10):
−α−2
LαDDξ−2(ξ2YP′)′=−αpkp(YP−κpY),
−α−2
LαDDξ−2(ξ2Y′)′=αpkp(YP−κpY),0< ξ < L.
1Note that these formulas contain no α’s, since they result from evaluation at αL=αD=
αk=αp= 1; consequently, βk,p=kk,p(1 +κk,p).
CONTROL OF HETEROGENEOUS NETWORKS 13
0246810−1−0.8−0.6−0.4−0.200.20.40.60.81
0246810−1−0.8−0.6−0.4−0.200.20.40.60.81
L(µm)CJ
pCJ
D
CJ
k
CJ
L
L(µm)Cc
p
Cc
DCc
L
Cc
k
Figure 5. Values of control coeﬃcients as a function of Lfor the
ﬁrst example (parallel membranes at distance L, the kinase and
phosphatase are localized at diﬀerent membranes; D= 1µm2/s,
kp=kk= 1/s,κp= 0.1,κk= 10).
Again note the dimensions of kkandkp: similar to the previous example, kkhas
dimension length/time; but here kpconverts a bulk concentration into a bulk ﬂux,
and therefore kphas the (more familiar) dimension 1/time. As before, the total
concentration is independent of ξ, and denoted by M:
M=YP+Y (27)
As a ﬁrst step we investigate diﬀerent boundary conditions, where we prescribe
the ﬂuxJ:
−α−1
LαDDYP′=J=α−1
LαDDY′, (28)
atξ=L. For this choice of boundary conditions we can solve the system exa ctly.
Setu=YP−κpY; thenusatisﬁes the equation
−α−2
LαDDξ−2(ξ2u′)′=−αpkp(1+κp)u,
with boundary condition
−α−1
LαDDu′(L) = (1+ κp)J.
We ﬁnd that uis given by
u(ξ) =−J1+κp
α−1
LαDDL2
γLcoshγL−sinhγLsinhγξ
ξ, (29)
where the inverse length scale γis deﬁned by
γ2=α2
Lαpkp(1+κp)
αDD.
14 MARK A. PELETIER, HANS V. WESTERHOFF, AND BORIS N. KHOLODE NKO
It follows that
YP(ξ) =κp
1+κpM+1
1+κpu(ξ)
Y(ξ) =1
1+κpM−1
1+κpu(ξ).(30)
To return to the boundary conditions 26 we equate the ﬂux Jin Eq. 28 with the
right-hand side of Eq. 26:
J=αkkk(YP(L)−κkY(L)) =αkkk/parenleftbigg1+κk
1+κpu(L)+κp−κk
1+κpM/parenrightbigg
;
using the expression 29 for uthis yields
J=ν
1+β, ν=αkkkMκp−κk
1+κp, β=αkkk1+κk
α−1
LαDDL
γLcothγL−1
(31)
(cothxis the hyperbolic cotangent, cosh x/sinhx).
As in the previous example we thus obtain explicit formulas for the con trol of
the various parameters on the ﬂux:
CJ
k=1
1+β
CJ
D=1
2β
1+βγLcothγL−2+γ2L2(coth2γL−1)
γLcothγL−1
CJ
p=1
2β
1+βγLcothγL−γ2L2(coth2γL−1)
γLcothγL−1
CJ
L=β
1+β1−γ2L2(coth2γL−1)
γLcothγL−1
As an example of the concentration control values we choose a poin t at distance
L/2 from the center of the cell. Denoting the control coeﬃcients with respect to
this quantity as Cc, we calculate
Cc
k=µCJ
k
Cc
D=µ/parenleftbigg
CJ
D+1
2φ−1/parenrightbigg
Cc
p=µ/parenleftbigg
CJ
p−1
2φ/parenrightbigg
Cc
L=µ/parenleftbig
CJ
L−φ+1/parenrightbig
Here
µ=u(L/2)
κpM+u(L/2)andφ=γ2L2
γLcothγL−1−γL
2coth/parenleftbiggγL
2/parenrightbigg
.
An example of the values of these control coeﬃcients is given in Figur e 6.
6.Discussion
Until fairly recently, biochemistry focused more on the time depend ent aspects
of processes than on the spatial aspects. Exceptions were the m embrane-mediated
subcompartmentation of cellular metabolism. The cellular subcompar tments were
CONTROL OF HETEROGENEOUS NETWORKS 15
024681000.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.91
0246810−1−0.500.5
L(µm)CJ
p
CJ
DCJ
kCJ
L
L(µm)Cc
pCc
D
Cc
LCc
k
Figure 6. Values of control coeﬃcients as a function of Lfor the
second example (a spherical cell with a kinase on the membrane
and a phosphatase in the cytosol; D= 1µm2/s,kp=kk= 1/s,
κp= 0.1,κk= 10).Ccdenotes control of the concentration mea-
sured halfway between the center and the membrane.
mostly considered to be homogeneous in terms of concentrations a nd the hetero-
geneity between them wasanalyzed in terms of the activity of trans port catalystsin
the membranes (Westerhoﬀ and van Dam 1987). Inhomogeneity of metabolites and
evenionswithin aqueoussubcompartmentshasoftenbeen propos ed(Kell1979)but
calculations have shown that at least for central metabolic routes aqueous diﬀusion
should be fast on the time scale of the catalytic turnover of the enz ymes also given
the proximity of the enzyme molecules due to the small sizes of cells (W esterhoﬀ
and van Dam 1987; Westerhoﬀ and Welch 1992). Metabolic Control A nalysis was
developed from this perspective and proved a useful way to ration alize the study
of regulation and control of intermediary metabolism (Fell 1997) an d free-energy
transduction (Westerhoﬀ and van Dam 1987). More than an analys is procedure,
Metabolic Control Analysis also provided biochemists with a set of laws (theorems)
that govern control of ﬂuxes and concentrations in metabolic net works. One type
of these were the summation theorems, stating that the sum of th e control by all
the individual enzyme catalyzed reactions on ﬂux and concentratio n (Kacser and
Burns 1973; Heinrich and Rapoport 1973), oscillation amplitude (Kho lodenko et al.
1997) or relaxation time constant (Heinrich and Reder 1991) should equal 1, 0, 1,
and 1 respectively.
Those were the days where biochemistry focused on metabolism. Ho wever, only
a minor fraction of the known genomes encodes primary metabolism. Much coding
capacity is devoted to regulation, in part through signal transduc tion (Kell 1979;
Kholodenko et al. 2000c). Signal transduction has (i) the spatial a spect that many
signals arrive at the cell’s plasma membrane and have to be transferr ed to its
16 MARK A. PELETIER, HANS V. WESTERHOFF, AND BORIS N. KHOLODE NKO
nuclear DNA, (ii) the added complication that much of the signal is tra nsferred
by proteins in direct phosphoryl transfers, rather than with sma ll molecules as
messengers, and (iii) the feature that those proteins are often p resent at a thousand
times lower concentrations than the usual metabolite. All these th ree features work
in the direction that might make diﬀusion of the components limiting in sig nal
transfer. Indeed, it was calculated that for realisticparameter v alues, concentration
gradientsinsignal(deﬁnedasin(Franckeetal.)) shouldarise(Fell1 980;Brownand
Kholodenko 1999; Kholodenko et al. 2000a), which might even force the cell to take
refuge to alternative mechanisms of movement of the signal prote ins (Kholodenko
2002).
With the realization of the possible importance of transport and diﬀu sion for
cell biochemistry, there came a need to update Metabolic Control A nalysis so as
to include the aspects of diﬀusion. This is what the ﬁrst part of this p aper accom-
plished for the summation theorem. The result was rather simple, to the sum of the
enzyme control coeﬃcients also coeﬃcients for the control by th e diﬀusion of the
various species needed to be added, as well as control coeﬃcients for the transport
processes and for the non-enzyme-catalyzed chemical reaction s, before it amounted
to 1 for ﬂux control and 0 for concentration control. This result is perhaps not
surprising, but has been overlooked eﬀectively in the literature for quite a while. In
studies of the control of growth rate of E. coliby the lactose permease, it was found
that a sum of 1 could not be found and it was suspected that part of the control
resided in diﬀusion across the outer membrane (Jensen et al. 1993; Dykhuizen et al.
1987). It was found that none of the glycolytic enzymes had signiﬁc ant control on
the glycolytic ﬂux in yeast. This was considered a problem until stron g indica-
tions arose of substantial control in glucose transport into the c ells (Reijenga et al.
2001). Thus, if anything, our extension of the summation theorem to include the
transport steps may open eyes to the possibility that transport c ontrols metabolic
ﬂuxes. Similarly we should expect renewed attention to arise from th e other term
in our summation theorem, i.e. the one that refers to control by th e diﬀusion. Of
course the novelty lies not so much in the possibility of such control, b ut in the fact
that it may account for a shortfall of metabolic control from the t otal of 1.
We have also formulated the summation theorem for the case of inho mogeneity
in both time and space, i.e. where a spatial gradient may be developing over time.
In that case diﬀusion and time turn out to share in the total ﬂux con trol of 1.
In the case of homogeneity in time (i.e. at steady state), the forme r contribution
disappears, in case of spatial homogeneity the latter. The experim ental system
that springs to mind is that of Belousov-Zhabotinsky reactions exh ibiting time
varying spirals (Zhabotinsky and Zaikin 1973), but closer to biology t he wave type
oscillations in yeast extracts (Mair et al. 2001). The most relevant a pplication
may be in developmental biology, but for this an extension to Hierarc hical Control
Analysis (Snoep et al. 2002) will be needed.
While the ﬁrst ﬂux summation result, Eq. 11, and the ﬁrst concentr ation sum-
mation result, Eq. 16, are a simple extension of existing theory, the summation
theorems concerning changes of spatial scale (Eqs. 18, 19, and 2 0) are fundamen-
tally new, and introduce a concept that is new to Metabolic Control A nalysis:
control by size.
CONTROL OF HETEROGENEOUS NETWORKS 17
‘Control by the size’, the quantity measured by CL, is a concept with some
interesting properties. For instance, CJ
LandCc
Lcan be both positive and negative.
This is related to the fact that the size of a system can inﬂuence the ‘productive’
capacity of the system in diﬀerent ways at the same time. Let us exa mine this for
ﬂux control:
•Size can be an obstacle: if material has to travel over a distance L, as in the
example of parallel membranes (Case 1 of Section 5), then an increa se inL
implies a decrease of the (average) concentration gradient, and t herefore
causes a reduction in diﬀusive ﬂux. This is the dominant eﬀect in the
large-Llimit of Case 1, as shown in Fig. 5, where it leads to a limit value
ofCJ
Lof−1.
•On the other hand, size can also be a resource: if a reaction takes p lace in
a bulk region of linear size L, thenLis also a measure of reactive capacity:
an increase in size will result in an increase of total reactive ﬂux. This is
demonstrated by the second example, where the input- and outpu t bound-
aries are co-located and no material is forced to travel over a dist anceL.
Here the control by size is positive, and in the limit of small Lthe control
even approaches 1.
The new summation theorems have a number of interesting implication s. Per-
haps the most striking one is that they impose an upper limit to the con trol that
diﬀusion may have on the ﬂux through the system. The ﬁrst summat ion theorem
suggested that this number be 1, i.e. if the biochemical and the tran sport processes
were in excess and the system were large; the second, however, s hows that it is only
1/2whenever the controlby size is positive (i.e. when increasingthe siz e results in a
higer ﬂux). Clearly, in such cases there must always be another pro cess controlling
ﬂux, in addition to diﬀusion. In the example of Fig. 6 the other proces ses were the
biochemical reactions.
The example of Figure 2 also shows how changing the diﬀusion rate alte rs the
concentration proﬁles. By increasing the diﬀusion rate we increase the width of
a ‘boundary layer’, in which a signiﬁcant part of the reactions takes p lace. As
a result the ﬂux is also increased. Note, however, that the relative increase in
size of the boundary layer (which scales as λ, sincex=αLξ=λξ) is the square
root of the increase of the diﬀusion coeﬃcients ( αDi=λ2). This can be explained
intuitivelyasfollows. The sizeofthe boundarylayeris determined byc ounteracting
forces; a thin boundary layer provides for fast spatial transpor t (on the scale of the
layer thickness), but little reactive capacity, while for a thick layer t he situation
is inversed. An increase in diﬀusion rate is therefore used partially to increase
transport rate, and partially to increase reaction capacity. The n umber 1/2 is the
result of this trade-oﬀ.
Acknowledgement
This workwas supported by the RTN network ‘Nonlinear Partial Diﬀer ential Equa-
tions describing Front Propagation and other Singular Phenomena’, HPRN-CT-
2002-00274, and by the National Institute of Health through Gra nt GM59570.
18 MARK A. PELETIER, HANS V. WESTERHOFF, AND BORIS N. KHOLODE NKO
References
Acerenza,L.,Sauro,H.M., andKacser,H.1989.Controlanalysis oftime-dependent
metabolic systems. J. Theoret. Biol. 137:423–444
Brown, G. C. and Kholodenko, B. N. 1999. Spatial gradients of cellu lar phospho-
proteins. FEBS Letters 457:452–454
Dykhuizen, D. E., Dean, A. M., and Hartl, D. L. 1987. Metabolic ﬂux an d ﬁtness.
Genetics 115:25–31
Fell, D. A. 1980. Theoretical analyses of the functioning of the high - and low- Km
cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterases in the regulation of the conce ntration of
adenosine 3’,5’-cyclic monophosphate in animal cells. J. Theor. Biol. 84:361–385
—. 1997. Understanding the Control of Metabolism. Portland Pres s, London
Francke, C., Postma, P. W., Westerhoﬀ, H. V., Blom, J. G., and Peletie r, M. A.
Why the phosphotransferase system of Escherichia coli escapes the diﬀusion
limitation of signal transduction, transport and metabolism that co nfronts mam-
malian cells
Haugh, J. M. and Lauﬀenburger, D. A. 1997. Physical modulation o f introcellular
signalling processes by locational regulation. Biophys. J. 72:2014–2031
Heinrich, R. and Rapoport, T. 1973. Linear theory of enzymatic ch ains; its appli-
cation for the analysis of the crossover theorem and of the glycoly sis of human
erythrocytes. Acta Biol. Med. Germ. 31:479–494
Heinrich, R. and Reder, C. 1991. Metabolic control analysis of relax ation processes.
J. Theor. Biol. 151:343–350
Jensen, P. R., Westerhoﬀ, H. V., and Michelsen, O. 1993. The use of lac-type
promoters in control analysis. Eur. J. Biochem. 211:181–191
Kacser, H. and Acerenza, L. 1993. A universal method for achiev ing increases in
metabolite production. Eur. J. Biochem. 216:361–367
Kacser, H. and Burns, J. 1973. The controlof ﬂux. Symp. Soc. Exp. Biol. 27:65–104
Katchalsky, A. and Curran, P. F. 1965. Nonequilibrium Thermodyna mics in Bio-
physics. Harvard
Kell, D. B. 1979. On the functional proton current pathway of elec tron transport
phosphorylation. An electrodic view. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 549:55–99
Kholodenko, B. N. 2002. MAP kinase signalling and endocytic traﬃckin g: A mar-
riage of convenience? Trends Cel. Biol. 12:173–177
Kholodenko, B. N., Brown, G. C., and Hoek, J. B. 2000a. Diﬀusion con trol of
protein phosphorylation in signal transduction pathways. Biochem. J. 350:901–
907
Kholodenko, B. N., Demin, O. V., and Westerhoﬀ, H. V. 1997. Contro l analysis of
periodic phenomena in biological systems. J. Phys. Chem. B101:2070–2081
Kholodenko, B. N., Hoek, J. B., and Westerhoﬀ, H. V. 2000b. Why cy toplasmic
signalling proteins should be recruited to cell membranes. Trends Cell Biol.
10:173–178
Kholodenko, B. N. and Westerhoﬀ, H. V. 1993. Metabolic channelling and control
of the ﬂux. FEBS Letters 320:71–74
—. 1994. Control theory of one enzyme. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1208:294–305
—. 1995. The macroworld versus the microworld of biochemical regu lation and
control.Trends Biochem. Sci. 20:52–54
Kholodenko, B. N., Westerhoﬀ, H. V., Schwaber, J., and Cascante, M. 2000c. En-
gineering a living cell to desired metabolite concentrations and ﬂuxes : Pathways
CONTROL OF HETEROGENEOUS NETWORKS 19
with multifunctional enzymes. Metabolic Engineering 2:1–13
Mair, T., Warnke, C., and Muller, S. C. 2001. Spatio-temporal dynam ics in glycol-
ysis.Faraday Discuss. 120:249–259
Reijenga, K. A., Snoep, J. L., Diderich, J. A., van Verseveld, H. W., We sterhoﬀ,
H. V., and Teusink, B. 2001. Control of glycolytic dynamics by hexos e transport
inSaccharomyces cerevisiae .Biophys. J.
Snoep, J. L., van der Weijden, C. C., Andersen, H. W., Westerhoﬀ, H . V., and
Jensen, P. R. 2002. DNA supercoiling in Escherichia coli is under tight and
subtle homeostatic control, involving gene-expression and metabo lic regulation
of both topoisomerase I and DNA gyrase. Eur. J. Biochem. 269:1662–1669
Westerhoﬀ, H. V. and van Dam, K. 1987. Thermodynamics and Cont rol of Biolog-
ical Free-energy Transduction. Elsevier, Amsterdam
Westerhoﬀ, H. V. and Welch, G. R. 1992. Enzyme organizationand t he direction of
metabolic ﬂow: Physicochemical considerations. Curr. Top. Cell. Regul. 33:361–
390
Zhabotinsky, A. M. and Zaikin, A. N. 1973. Autowave processes in a distributed
chemical system. J. Theor. Biol. 40:45–61
