arXiv:math/0304372v1  [math.PR]  24 Apr 2003ICM 2002 ·Vol. III·1–3
Biological Sequence Analysis
T. P. Speed∗
Abstract
This talk will review a little over a decade’s research on app lying certain
stochastic models tobiological sequence analysis. The mod els themselves have
a longer history, going back over 30 years, although many nov el variants have
arisen since that time. The function of the models in biologi cal sequence
analysis is to summarize the information concerning what is known as a motif
or a domain in bioinformatics, and to provide a tool for disco vering instances
of that motif or domain in a separate sequence segment. We wil l introduce the
motif models in stages, beginning from very simple, non-sto chastic versions,
progressively becoming more complex, until we reach modern proﬁle HMMs
for motifs. A second example will come from gene ﬁnding using sequence data
from one or two species, where generalized HMMs or generaliz ed pair HMMs
have proved to be very eﬀective.
2000 Mathematics Subject Classiﬁcation: 60J20, 92C40.
Keywords and Phrases: Motif, Regular expression, Proﬁle, HiddenMarkov
model.
1. Introduction
DNA(deoxyribonucleicacid), RNA(ribonucleicacid), andproteinsar emacro-
molecules which are unbranched polymers built up from smaller units. I n the case
of DNA these units are the 4 nucleotide residues A (adenine), C (cyt osine), G (gua-
nine) and T (thymine) while for RNA the units are the 4 nucleotide resid ues A, C,
G and U (uracil). For proteins the units are the 20 amino acid residues A (alanine),
C (cysteine) D (aspartic acid), E (glutamic acid), F (phenylalanine), G (glycine), H
(histidine), I (isoleucine), K (lysine), L (leucine), M (methionine), N ( asparagine),
P (proline), Q (glutamine), R (arginine), S (serine), T (threonine), V (valine), W
(tryptophan) and Y (tyrosine). To a considerable extent, the ch emical properties
of DNA, RNA and protein molecules are encoded in the linear sequence of these
basic units: their primary structure.
∗Department of Statistics, University of California, Berke ley, CA 94720, USA; Division of
Genetics and Bioinformatics, Walter and Eliza Hall Institu te of Medical Research, VIC 3050,
Australia. E-mail: terry@stat.berkeley.edu
98 T. P. Speed
The use of statistics to study linear sequences of biomolecular units can be
descriptive or it can be predictive. A very wide range of statistical t echniques has
been used in this context, and while statistical models can be extrem ely useful,
the underlying stochastic mechanisms should never be taken literally . A model or
methodcanbreakdownatanytimewithoutnotice. Further,biologic alconﬁrmation
of predictions is almost always necessary.
The statistics of biological sequences can be global or it can be local. For
example, we might consider the global base composition of genomes: E. colihas
25% A, 25% C, 25% G, 25% T, while P. falciparum has 82%A+T. At the very
local, the triple ATG is the near universal motif indicating the start of translation
in DNA coding sequence. A major role of statistics in this context is to characterize
individual sequences or classes of biological sequences using proba bility models,
and to make use of these models to identify them against a backgrou nd of other
sequences. Needless to say, the models and the tools vary greatly in complexity.
Extensive use is made in biological sequence analysis of the notions of motif or
domain in proteins, and site in DNA. We shall use these terms intercha ngeably to
describe the recurring elements of interest to us. It is important t o note that while
we focus on the sequence characteristics of motifs, domains or sit es, in practice they
also embody (biochemical) structural signiﬁcance.
2. Deterministic models
The C2H2 (cysteine-cysteine histidine-histidine) zinc-ﬁnger DNA bin ding do-
main is composed of 25-30 amino acid residues including two conserved cysteines
and two conserved histidines spaced in a particular way, with some re strictions on
the residues in between and nearby. Of course the arrangement r eﬂects the three-
dimensional molecular structure into which the amino-acid sequence folds, for it is
the structure which has the real biochemical signiﬁcance, see Figu re 1, which was
obtained from http://www.rcsb.org/pdb/ . An example of this motif is the 27-
Figure 1: A C2H2 zinc ﬁnger DNA binding domain
Biological Sequence Analysis 99
letter sequence known as 1ZNF, this being a Protein Data Bank ident iﬁer for the
structure XFIN-31 of X. laevis . Its amino acid sequence is
1ZNF: XYKCGLCERSFVEKSALSRHQRVHKNX
Note the presence of the two Cs separated by 2 other residues, and the two Hs
separated by 3 other residues. Here and elsewhere, X denotes an arbitrary amino
acid residue. A popular and useful summary description of C2H2 zinc ﬁngers which
clearly includes our example, is the regular expression
C−X(2,4)−C−X(3)−[LIVMFYWC ]−X(8)−H−X(3,5)−H
whereX(m)denotesasequenceof nunspeciﬁedaminoacids, while X(m,n)denotes
frommtonsuch, and the bracketsenclose mutually exclusive alternatives. Th ere is
a richer set of notation for regular expressions of this kind, but for our purposes it is
enough to note that this representationis essentiallydeterministic , with uncertainty
included only through mutually exclusive possibilities (e.g. length or res idue) which
are not otherwise distinguished.
Simple and eﬃcient algorithms exist for searching query sequences o f residues
to ﬁnd every instance of the regular expression above. In so doing with sequence
in which all instances of the motif are known, we may identify some sub -sequences
of the query sequence which are not C2H2 zinc ﬁnger DNA binding dom ains, i.e.
which are false positives, and we may miss some sub-sequences which are C2H2
zinc ﬁngers, i.e. which are false negatives. Thus we have essentially d eterministic
descriptions and search algorithms for the C2H2 motifs using regula r expressions.
Their performance can be described by the frequency of false pos itives and false
negatives, equivalently, their complements, the speciﬁcity and sen sitivity of the
regular expression. We do not have space for an extensive bibliogra phy, so for more
on regular expressions and on most of the other concepts we intro duce below, see
[2].
3. Regular expressions can be limiting
Most protein binding sites are characterized by some degree of seq uence speci-
ﬁcity, but seeking a consensus DNA sequence is often an inadequat e way to rec-
ognize their motifs. Simply listing the alternatives seen at a position ma y not be
very informative, but keeping track of the frequencies with which t he diﬀerent al-
ternatives appear can be very valuable. Thus position-speciﬁc nuc leotide or amino
acid distributions came to represent the variability in DNA or protein m otif com-
position. This is just the set of marginal distribution of letters at ea ch position.
Rather than present an extensive tabulation of frequencies for o ur C2H2 zinc ﬁn-
ger example, we present a pictorial representation: a sequence lo go coming from
http://blocks.fhcrc.org .
Sequencelogosarescaledrepresentationofposition-speciﬁcnuc leotideoramino
acid distributions. The overall height at a given position is proportion al to infor-
mation content, which is a constant minus the entropy of the distrib ution at that
100 T. P. Speed
Figure 2: Sequence logo for C2H2 zinc ﬁnger
position. The proportions of each nucleotide or amino acid at a positio n are in re-
lation to their observed frequency at that position, with the most f requent on top,
the next most frequent below, etc.
4. Proﬁles
It is convenient for our present purposes to deﬁne a proﬁle as a se t of position-
speciﬁc distributions describing a motif. (Traditionally the term has b een used for
the derived scores.) How would we use a set of such distributions to s earch a query
sequence for instances of the motif? The answer from bioinformat ics is that we
scorethe query sequence, and for suitably large scores, declare that a candidate
subsequence is an instance of our motif.
There are a number of approaches for deriving proﬁle scores, but the easiest to
explain here is this: scores are log-likelihood ratio test statistics , for discriminating
between a probability model Mfor the motif and a model Bfor the background.
The model Mwill be the direct product of the position-speciﬁc distributions, (i.e.
the independent but not identical distribution model), while the back ground model
Bwill be the direct product of a set of relevant background frequen cies (i.e. the
independent and identical distribution model). Thus, if falis the frequency of
residueaat position lof the motif, and fabackground frequency of the same
residue, then the proﬁle score assigned to residue aat position lin a possible
instance of the motif will be sal= logfal/fa. These scores are then summed across
the positions in the motif, and compared to a suitably deﬁned thresh old. Note
that proper setting of the threshold requires a set of data in which all instances
of the motif are known. The false positive and false negative rate co uld then be
Biological Sequence Analysis 101
determined for various thresholds, and a suitable choice made.
We brieﬂy discuss variants of the log-likelihood ratio scores. In many contexts,
it will matter little whether a position is occupied by a leucine ( L) rather than an
isoleucine ( I), as each can evolve in time to or from the other rather more readily
than from other residues. Thus it might make sense to modify the sc ores to take
this and similar evolutionary patterns into account. Indeed the ﬁrs t use of proﬁles
involved scores of this kind, using the position speciﬁc amino acid distr ibution
of an alignment of instances of the motif and entries from what are k nown as
PAMmatrices, which embody patterns of molecular evolution. In addition , the
background distribution of residues may be modelled more detailed ma nner, e.g.
using the so-called Dirichlet mixture models.
It is also possible to include position-speciﬁc scores for insertion and deletion
of residues, relative to a consensus pattern. When these are use d, the scoring
becomes a little more subtle, as the problem is then quite analogous to pairwise
sequence alignment, but with position dependent scoring paramete rs for matches,
mismatches, insertions and deletions.
We summarise this section by noting that probability has entered into our
description through the use of frequencies, and scores based on them, but so far we
do not have global statistical models, at least not ones embodying in sertions and
deletions, on which we base our estimation and testing. These are all part of the
use of proﬁle HMMs, but ﬁrst we introduce HMMs.
5. Hidden Markov models
Hidden Markov models (HMMs) are processes ( St,Ot),t= 1,...,T, whereSt
is the hidden state and Otthe observation at time t. Their probabilistic evolution
is constrained by the equations
pr(St|St−1,Ot−1,St−2,Ot−2,...) =pr(St|St−1),
pr(Ot|St−1,Ot−1,St−2,Ot−2,...) =pr(Ot|St,St−1).
The deﬁnitions and basic facts concerning HMMs were laid out in a serie s of beauti-
ful papers by L. E. Baum and colleagues around 1970, see [2] for re ferences. Much
of their formulation has been used almost unchanged to this day. Ma ny variants
are now used. For example, the distribution of Omay not depend on previous S,
or it may also depend on previous Ovalues,
pr(Ot|St,St−1,Ot−1,...) =pr(Ot|St),or
pr(Ot|St,St−1,Ot−1,...) =pr(Ot|St,St−1,Ot−1).
Most importantly for us below, the times of SandOmay be decoupled, permit-
ting the observation corresponding to state time tto be a string whose length and
composition depends on St(and possibly St−1and part or all of the previous ob-
servations). This is called a hidden semi-Markov or generalized hidden Markov
model.
102 T. P. Speed
Early applications of HMMs were to ﬁnance, but these were never pu blished,
to speech recognition, and to modelling ion channels. In the mid-late 1 980s HMMs
entered genetics and molecular biology, where they are now ﬁrmly en trenched. One
of the major reasons for the success of HMMs as stochastic mode ls is the fact that
although they are substantial generalizations of Markov chains, t here are elegant
dynamic programming algorithms which permit full likelihood calculations in many
cases of interest. Speciﬁcally, there are algorithms which permit th e eﬃcient calcu-
lation of a) pr(sequence |M), where sequence is a sequence of observations and M
is an HMM; b) the maximum over statesofpr(states|sequence,M ), where statesis
theunobservedstatesequenceunderlyingtheobservation sequence ; andc)themax-
imum likelihood estimates of parameters in M based on the observation sequence .
Step c) is carried out by an iterative procedure which in the case of in dependent
states was later termed the EM algorithm.
6. Proﬁle HMMs
In a landmark paper A. Krogh, D. Haussler and co-workers introdu ced proﬁle
HMMs into bioinformatics. An illustrative form of their proﬁle HMM arch itecture
is given in Figure 3. There we depict the underlying state space of the hidden
Figure 3: State space of a simple proﬁle HMM
Markov chain of a proﬁle HMM of length 4, with Mdenoting matchstates,Iinsert
states and Ddeletestates, while BandEarebeginandendstates, respectively.
Encircled states ( D,BandE) do not emit observations, while each of the match
and insert states will have position-speciﬁc observation or emission distributions.
Finally, each arrow will have associated transition probabilities, with t he expecta-
tion being that the horizontal transition probabilities are typically ne ar unity. This
the chain proceeds from left to right, and if it remains within match st ates, its
output will be an amino acid sequence of length 4. Deviation to the inse rt or delete
states will modify the output accordingly. The similarity with a direct p roduct of
a sequence of position-speciﬁc distributions should be unmistakeab le. The proﬁle
HMMs in use now have considerably more features, while sharing the b asicM,I
andDarchitecture.
Biological Sequence Analysis 103
Why was the introduction of the HMM formalism such an advance? The
answer is simple: it permitted the construction and application of pro ﬁles to be
conducted entirely within a formal statistical framework, and tha t really helped.
Instances of the motif embodied in an HMM could be identiﬁed by calcula ting
pr(sequence |M)/pr(sequence |B) as was done with proﬁles, using the algorithm for
problem a) in X above. Instances of the motif could be aligned to the H MM by
calculating the most probable state sequence giving rise to the motif sequence, in
essence ﬁnding the most probable sequence of matches, insertion s, deletions which
align the given sequence to the others which gave rise to the HMM, cf . problem b)
above. And ﬁnally, the parametersin the HMMs couldbe estimated fr om data com-
prising known instances of the motif by using maximum likelihood, an impo rtant
step for many reasons, one being that it put insert and delete scor es on precisely the
same footing as match and mismatch scores. Although the estimatio n of HMM pa-
rameters is easiest if the example sequences are properly aligned, t he EM algorithm
(problem c) above) does not require aligned sequences.
In the years since the introduction of proﬁle HMMs, they have been become
the standard approach to representing motifs and protein domain s. The database
Pfam (http://pfam.wustl.edu ) now has 3,849 hidden Markov models (May 2002)
representing recognized protein or DNA domains or motifs. Proﬁle H MMs have es-
sentiallyreplacedtheuseofregularexpressionsandtheoriginalpr oﬁlesforsearching
other databases to ﬁnd novel instances of a motif, for ﬁnding a mo tif or domain
match to an input sequence, and for aligning a motif or domain to a an e xisting
family. There is considerable evidence that the HMM-based searche s are more pow-
erful than the older proﬁle based ones, though they are slower co mputationally, and
at times that is an important consideration.
7. Finding genes in DNA sequence
Identifying genes in DNA sequence is one of the most challenging, inte resting
and important problems in bioinformatics today. With so many genome s being
sequenced so rapidly, and the experimental veriﬁcation of genes la gging far behind,
it is necessary to rely on computationally derived genes in order to ma ke immediate
use of the sequence.
What is a gene? Most readers will have heard of the famous central dogma
of molecular biology, in which the hereditary material of an organism r esides in its
genome, usually DNA, and where genes are expressed in a two-stag e process: ﬁrst
DNA istranscribed into a messenger RNA (mRNA) sequence, and later a processed
form of this sequence is translated into an amino acid sequence, i.e. a protein. In
general the transcribed sequence is longer than the translated p ortion: parts called
introns (intervening sequence) are removed, leaving exons (expr essed sequence), of
which only some are expressed, while the rest remain untranslated. The translated
sequence comes in triples called codons, beginning and ending with a un ique start
(ATG) and one of three stop (TAA, TAG, TGA) codons. There are a lso character-
istic intron-exon boundaries called splice donor and acceptor sites, and a variety of
other motifs: promoters, transcription start sites, polyA sites, branching sites, and
104 T. P. Speed
so on.
All of the foregoing have statistical characterizations, and in prin ciple they
can all help identify genes in long otherwise unannotated DNA sequen ce segments.
To get an idea of the magnitude of the task with the human genome, c onsider the
following facts about human gene sequences [5]: the coding regions c omprise about
1.5% of the entire genome; the average gene length is about 27,000 b p (base pair);
the average total coding region is 1,340 bp; and the average intron length is about
3,300 bp. Further, only about 8% of genes have a single exon. We see that the
information in human genes is very dispersed along the genome, and t hat in general
the parts of primary interest, the coding exons, are a relatively sm all fraction of the
gene, on average about1
20.
8. Generalized HMMs for ﬁnding genes
The HMMs which are eﬀective in ﬁnding genes are the generalized HMMs
(GHMMs) described in section 5. above. Space does not permit our g iving an ad-
equate description here, so we simply outline the architecture of Ge nscan [1] one
of the most widely used human geneﬁnders. States represent the gene features
we mentioned above: exon, intron, and of course intergenic region , and a variety of
other features (promotor, untranslated region, polyA site, and so on. Output obser-
vations embody state-dependent nucleotide composition, depend ence, and speciﬁc
signal features (such as stop codons). In a GHMM the state duration needs to be
modelled, as well as two other important features of genes in DNA: t hereading
frame, which corresponds to the triples along the mRNA sequence which ar e se-
quentially translated, and the strand, as DNA is double stranded, and genes can be
on either strand, i.e. they can point in either direction. These featu res can be seen
in Figure 4, which was kindly supplied by Lior Pachter.
The output of a GHMM geneﬁnder after processing a genomic segme nt is
broadlysimilartothat fromaproﬁleHMM afterprocessinganaminoac idsequence:
the most probable state sequence given an observation sequence is a best gene
annotation of that sequence, and a variety of probabilities can be c alculated to
indicate the support in the observation sequence for various spec iﬁc gene features.
9. Comparative sequence analysis using HMMs
The large number of sequenced genomes now available, and the obse rvation
thatfunctionallyimportantregionsareevolutionarilyconserved,h asledtoeﬀortsto
incorporate conservation into the models and methods of biological sequence anal-
ysis. Pair HMMs were introduced in [2] as a way of including alignment pro blems
under the HMM framework, and recently [4] they were combined with GHMMs
(forming GPHMMs) to carry out alignment and geneﬁnding with homolo gous seg-
ments of the mouse and human genomes. Use of the program SLAM o n the whole
Biological Sequence Analysis 105
Figure 4: Forward half of the Genscan GHMM state space
mousegenome( http://bio.math.berkeley.edu/slam/mouse/ ) demonstrated the
value of GPHMMs in this context.
10. Challenges in biological sequence analysis
The ﬁrst challenge is to understand the biology well enough to begin b iological
sequence analysis. This part will frequently involve collaborations wit h biologists.
With HMMs, GHMMs and GPHMMs, designing the underlying architectur e, and
carryingoutthe modelling forthe componentsparts, e.g. for splice sitesin geneﬁnd-
ingGHMM is perhapsthe next majorchallenge. Undoubtedly the hard est andmost
important task of all is the implementation: coding up the algorithms a nd making
it all work with error-prone and incomplete sequence data. Finally, it is usually a
real challenge to ﬁnd good data sets for calibrating and evaluating t he algorithms,
and for carrying out studies of competing algorithms.
Forarecentexampleofthisprocess,whichisamodelofitskind, see [3]. There
an HMM is presented for the so-called σArecognition sites, which involve two DNA
motifs separated by a variable number of base pairs. In addition to t he examples
mentioned so far, there are many more HMMs in the bioinformatics lite rature, see
p. 79 of [2] for ones published before 1998.
11. Closing remarks
106 T. P. Speed
In this short survey of biological sequence analysis, I have simply to uched on
someofthe majorideas. Amuchmorecomprehensivetreatment of materialcovered
here can be found in the book [2], whose title not coincidentally is the sa me as
that of this paper. Many important ideas from biological sequence a nalysis have
not been mentioned here, including molecular evolution and phylogene tic inference,
and the use of stochastic context-free grammars, a form of gen eralization of HMMs
suited to the analysis of RNA sequence data.
At this Congress I have talked (and am now writing) on the research of others,
in an area in which my own contributions have been negligible. I chose to do so
upon being honoured by the invitation to speak at this Congress bec ause I believe
this topic – HMMs – to be one of the great success stories of applying mathematics
to bioinformatics. In my view it is the one most worthy of a wider mathe matical
audience. I hope that the fact that there are many others bette r suited than me to
speak on this topic will not prevent readers from appreciating it and following it up
through the bibliography.
I owe what understanding I have of this ﬁeld to collaborations and dis cussions
with a number of people, and I would like to acknowledge them here. Fir stly, Tony
Wirth, Simon Cawley and Mauro Delorenzi, with whom I have worked on H HMMs.
Next, it has been an honour and pleasure to observe from close by t he development
of SLAM, by Simon Cawley, Lior Pachter and Marina Alexandersson. F inally I’d
like to thank Xiaoyue Zhou and Ken Simpson for their kind help to me whe n I was
preparing my talk and this paper.
References
[1] C.Burge&S.Karlin, Predictionofcompletegenestructuresin hu mangenomic
DNA,J. Mol. Biol. 268 (1997) 78–94.
[2] R. Durbin, S. Eddy, A. Krogh & G. Mitchison, Biological Sequence Analysis.
Probabilistic models of proteins and nucleic acids , Cambridge University Press,
1998.
[3] H. Jarmer, T. S. Larsen, A. Krogh, H. H. Saxild, S. Brunak & S. K nudsen,
Sigma A recognition sites in the Bacillus subtilis genome, Microbiology 147
(2001), 2417–2424.
[4] L. Pachter, M. Alexandersson & S. Cawley, Applications of gener alized pair
hidden Markovmodels to alignment and gene ﬁnding problems, J. Comp. Biol.
9 (2002), 389–399.
[5] The Genome Sequencing Consortium, Initial sequencing and analy sis of the
human genome, Nature409 (2001), 860–921.
