arXiv:math/0305013v1  [math.DS]  1 May 2003ICM 2002 ·Vol. III·1–3
Rhythms of the Nervous System:
Mathematical Themes and Variations
Nancy Kopell∗
Abstract
The nervous system displays a variety of rhythms in both waki ng and
sleep. These rhythms have been closely associated with diﬀe rent behavioral
and cognitive states, but it is still unknown how the nervous system makes use
of these rhythms to perform functionally important tasks. T o address those
questions, it is ﬁrst useful to understood in a mechanistic w ay the origin of
the rhythms, their interactions, the signals which create t he transitions among
rhythms, and the ways in which rhythms ﬁlter the signals to a n etwork of
neurons.
This talk discusses how dynamical systems have been used to i nvestigate
the origin, properties and interactions of rhythms in the ne rvous system. It
focuses on how the underlying physiology of the cells and syn apses of the
networks shape the dynamics of the network in diﬀerent conte xts, allowing the
variety ofdynamical behaviors tobedisplayed bythesame ne twork. The work
is presented using a series of related case studies on diﬀere nt rhythms. These
case studies are chosen to highlight mathematical issues, a nd suggest further
mathematical work tobedone. The topics include: diﬀerentr oles ofexcitation
and inhibition in creating synchronous assemblies of cells , diﬀerent kinds of
building blocks for neural oscillations, and transitions a mong rhythms. The
mathematical issues include reduction of large networks to low dimensional
maps, role of noise, global bifurcations, use of probabilis tic formulations.
2000 Mathematics Subject Classiﬁcation: 37N25, 92C20.
1. Introduction
The nervous system creates many diﬀerent rhythms, each assoc iated with a
range of behaviors and cognitive states. The rhythms were ﬁrst d iscovered from
scalp recordings of humans, and the names by which they are known still come
mainly from the electroencephalograph (EEG) literature, which pay s attention to
∗Boston University, Department of Mathematics and Center fo r BioDynamics, Boston, MA
02215, USA. E-mail: nk@bu.edu
806 Nancy Kopell
the frequency and behavioralcontext of those rhythms, but no t to their mechanistic
origins. Therhythmicpatternsincludethealpha(9-11Hz), beta(1 2-30Hz), gamma
(30-80 Hz), theta (4-8 Hz), delta (2-4) Hz and slow wave (.5-2 Hz) rhythms. The
boundaries of these ranges are rough. More will be said about the c ircumstances in
which some of these rhythms are displayed.
Itisnowpossibletogetfarmoreinformationaboutthemechanismsb ehind the
dynamics of the nervous system from other techniques, including e lectrophysiology.
The revolutions in experimental techniques, data acquisition and an alysis, and fast
computation have opened up a broad and deep avenue for mathema tical analysis.
The general question addressed by those interested in rhythms is : how does the
brain make use of these rhythms in sensory processing, sensory- motor coordination
and cognition? The mathematical strategy, to be discussed below, is to investigate
the “dynamical structure” of the diﬀerent rhythms to get clues t o function. Most
of this talk is about dynamical structure, and the mathematical iss ues surrounding
its investigation. I’ll return at the end to issues of function.
2. Neuromath
Themathematicalframeworkforthe studyofbraindynamicsaret heHodgkin-
Huxley(HH) equations. Thesearepartialdiﬀerentialequationsde scribingthe prop-
agation of action potentials in neurons (cells of the nervoussystem ). The equations,
which play the same role in neural dynamics that Navier-Stokes does in ﬂuid dy-
namics, are an elaborate analogy to a distributed electrical circuit. The central
equation,
Cv′=/summationdisplay
Iion+▽2v+/summationdisplay
Isyn+Iext
describes conservation of current across a piece of a cell membra ne;vis the cross-
membrane voltage and the left hand side is the capacitive current. T he ﬁrst sum on
the right hand side represents the intrinsically generated ionic curr ents across the
membrane. The term ▽2vrepresents the spatial diﬀusion, and Iextthe current fed
intothe cell./summationtextIsynrepresentsthe currentsintroducedby couplingfrom othercells.
Thus, these equations can also be used to model networks of inter acting neurons,
the focus of this talk.
Each of the intrinsic currents Iionis described by Ohm’s law: Iionis electro-
motive force divided by resistance. In this context, one usually use s the concept
of “conductance”, which is the reciprocal of resistance. The elec tromotive force
depends on the type of charged ion (e.g., Na, K, Ca, Cl) and the volta ge of the cell;
it has the form [ v−Vion], where Vionis the so-called “reversal potential” of that
ion.
The dynamics of the conductances are what make the equations so mathemat-
ically interesting and rich. In a simple description of the conductance , each ionic
current has up to two “gates”, which open or close at rates that a re dependent on
the voltage of the cell. For each such gate, there is then a ﬁrst ord er equation of
the form
x′= [x∞(v)−x]/τx(v)
Rhythms of the Nervous System: Mathematical Themes and Variat ions 807
where x denotes the fraction of channels of that type that are op en at any given
time,x∞(v) is the steady state value of xfor a ﬁxed voltage, and τx(v) is the rate
constant of that gating variable. For example, the standard Na cu rrent has the
formINa=gm3h[v−VNa], wheregis the maximal conductance, and mandhare
gatingvariablessatisfyingtheaboveequationfor x. Thedynamicsfor mandhdiﬀer
becausem∞(v) is an increasing function of v, whileh∞(v) is a decreasing function;
alsoτm(v) is much smaller than τh(v). The (chemical) synaptic currents have the
same form as the intrinsic ones, with the diﬀerence that the depend ence of the
driving force on voltage uses that of the post-synaptic cell, while th e conductance
depends on the pre-synaptic voltage. That is, Isynhas the form g/hatwidex[v−Vsyn],
where/hatwidexsatisﬁes the equation for x above, with vreplaced by /hatwidev, the voltage of
the cell sending the signal, and Vsynis the reversal potential of the synapse. The
coupling is said to be excitatory if the current is inward (increases vo ltage toward
the threshold for ﬁring an action potential) or inhibitory if the curre nt is outward
(moves voltage away from threshold for ﬁring.)
For a simple version of the HH equations, there are three ionic curre nts; one
of these (Na) creates an inward current leading to an action poten tial, one (K) an
outward current helping to end the action potential, and a leak curr ent (mainly Cl)
with no gating variable. The HH equations are not one single set of equ ations, but a
general(and generalizable)formforafamilyofequations, corres pondingto diﬀerent
sets of intrinsic currents (which can depend on position on the neur on), diﬀerent
neuron geometries, and diﬀerent networks created by interactio ns of neurons, which
may themselves be highly inhomogeneous. Numerical computation ha s become
highly important for observing the behavior of these equations, bu t does not suﬃce
to understand the behavior, especially to get insight into what the s peciﬁc ionic
currents contribute; this is where the analysis, including simpliﬁcatio n, comes in.
For an introduction to HH equations, some analysis and some of its us es in models,
see [1].
2.1. Some mathematical issues associated with rhythms
It is not possible to analyze the full class of equations in all generality . Our
strategy is to look for mathematical structures underlying some c lasses of behav-
ior observed experimentally; the emphasis is on the role of dynamical systems, as
opposed to statistics, though probabilistic ideas enter the analysis .
Ourcentralscientiﬁcquestionhereishowrhythmsemergefromth e“wetware”,
as modeled by the HH equations. As we will see, diﬀerent rhythms can be based on
diﬀerent sets of intrinsic currents, diﬀerent classes of neurons, and diﬀerent ways of
hooking up those cells. There are some behaviors we can see by lookin g at small
networks, and others that do not appear until the networks are large and somewhat
heterogeneous. Even in the small networks, there are a multiplicity of diﬀerent
building blocks for the rhythms, with excitation and inhibition playing diﬀ erent
roles. Noise appears, and plays diﬀerent roles from heterogeneity .
Investigators often use simpliﬁcations of the HH equations. For ex ample, this
talk deals only with “space clamped” cells in which the spatial distributio n of each
cell is ignored, and the equations become ODEs. (There are circums tances under
808 Nancy Kopell
which this can be a bad approximation, as in [2]). Under some circumsta nces, the
4-dimensional simplest space-clamped HH equations (one current e quation, three
gating variables) can be reduced to a one-dimensional equation; th us, networks of
neurons can be described by a fraction of the equations that one n eeds for the full
HH network equations. Another kind of reduction replaces the full HH ODEs by
maps that follow the times of the spikes. In both cases, there are a t least heuristic
explanations for why these reductions are often very successfu l, and hints about
how and why the simpliﬁcations can be expected to break down.
3. Mathematics and small networks of neurons
3.1. Centrality of inhibition in rhythms
Some kinds of cells coupled by inhibition like to form rhythms and synchr o-
nize [3-5]. This is unintuitive, because inhibition to cells can temporarily k eep the
latter from ﬁring (see below for important exceptions), but mutua l inhibition can
encourage cells to ﬁre simultaneously.
There are various ways to see this, with methods that are valid in diﬀe rent
contexts. For weak coupling, it can be shown rigorously that the fu ll equations
reduce to interactions between phases of the oscillators [6]; the pa rticular coupling
associated with inhibition can then be shown to be synchronizing (tho ugh over
many cycles) [7]. If the equations can be reduced to one-dimensiona l “integrate and
ﬁre” models, one can use “spike-response methods” to see the sy nchronizing eﬀect
of inhibitory synapses on timing of spikes . Both of these are describ ed in [6] along
with more references.
Another method, which I believe is most intuitive, looks at the ongoing eﬀect
of forced inhibition on the voltage of the cells, and how some of the pr ocesses
are “slaved” to others. This is seen most clearly in the context of an other one-
dimensional reduction that has become known as the “theta” mode l, because of
the symbols used for the phase of the oscillations [8]. The reduced eq uations have
been shown to be a canonical reduction of equations that are near a saddle-node
bifurcation on an invariant circle (limit cycle). Many versions of HH-like models
(and some kinds of real neurons) have this property for paramet er values near onset
of periodic spiking, and they are known as “Type 1” neurons.
The “theta model” has the form
θ′= (1−cosθ)+I(1+cosθ).
Heretheequationforthephase θhasperiodicsolutionsiftheparameter Iispositive,
and two ﬁxed points (stable, saddle) if Iis negative. To understand the eﬀects of
forced inhibition, we replace Iby a time dependent inhibition given by I−gs(t),
wheres(t) = exp(−t/τ) fort >0,and zero otherwise. With the change of variables
J(t) = 1−gexp(−t/τ), this is a 2-D autonomous system. Figures [9] and analysis
show that the system has two special orbits, known in the non-sta ndard analysis
literature as “rivers” [10], and that almost all of the trajectories f eed quickly into
Rhythms of the Nervous System: Mathematical Themes and Variat ions 809
one of these, and are repelled from the other. The essential eﬀec t is that initial
conditions become irrelevant to the outcome of the trajectories. A similar eﬀect
works for mutually coupled systems of inhibitory neurons.
The rhythm formed in this way is highly dependent on the time scale of d ecay
of the inhibition for the frequency of the network [11, 12]. These mo dels, and
the “fast-ﬁring” inhibitory cells that they represent, can display a large range of
frequencies depending on the bias ( Iextin HH, the parameter Iin the theta model);
however, in the presence of a small amount of heterogeneity in par ameters, the
rhythm falls apart unless the frequency is in the gamma range (30-8 0 Hz) [4, 13].
This can be understood from spike response methods or in terms of rivers.
The above rhythm is known as ING or interneuron gamma [14, 15]. A va ria-
tion on this uses networks with fast-ﬁring inhibitory cells (interneur ons or I cells)
and excitatory cells (pyramidal cells or E-cells). This is called PING (py ramidal
interneurongamma) [14, 15]. Heuristically, it is easyto understand t he rhythm: the
inhibitory cells are set so they do not ﬁre without input from the E-ce lls. When the
E-cells ﬁre, they cause the I-cells to cross ﬁring threshold and inhib it the E-cells,
which ﬁre again when the inhibition wears oﬀ. This simple mechanism beco mes
much more subtle when there is heterogeneity and noise in large netw orks, which
will be discussed later.
3.2. Excitation and timing maps
The fast-ﬁring cells described above are modeled using only the ionic c urrents
needed to create a spike. Most other neurons have channels to ex press many other
ionic currents as well, with channel kinetics that range over a large s pan of time
constants. These diﬀerent currents change the dynamical beha vior of the cells, and
allow such cells to be “Type II”, which means that the onset of rhyth mic spiking
as bias is changed is accompanied by a Hopf bifurcation instead of a sa ddle node.
The type of onset has important consequences for the ability of pa ir of such cells
to synchronize. E.g., models of the fast-ﬁring neuron, if connecte d by excitatory
synapses, do not synchronize, as can be shownfrom weak coupling or other methods
described above (e.g., [7]). However, if the cells are Type II, they do synchronize
stably with excitation (and not with inhibition). This was shown by Gutk in and
Ermentrout using weak coupling methods [16]. A more speciﬁc case st udy was done
by Acker et al. [17], motivated by neurons in the part of the cortex t hat constitutes
the input-output pathways to the hippocampus, a structure of t he brain important
to learning and recall. These cells are excitatory and of Type II (J.Wh ite, in prep.);
models of these cells, based on knowledge of the currents that the y express, do
synchronize with excitatory synapses, and do not with inhibitory sy napses.
The synchronizationproperties of the such cells can be understoo d from spike-
timing functions and maps [17]. Given the HH equations for the cell, one can
introduce at any time in the cycle excitation or inhibition whose time cou rse is
similar to what the synapse would provide. From this, one can comput e how much
the next spike is advanced or delayed by this synapse. From such a g raph, one can
compute a spike-time map which takes the diﬀerence in spike times in a s ingle cycle
to the diﬀerence in the next cycle.
810 Nancy Kopell
The analysis of such a map is easy, but the process raises deeper ma thematical
issues. One set of issues concerns what is happening at the biophys ical level that
gives rise to the Type II bifurcation, which is associated with a partic ular shape of
the spike advance function [18]. Analysis shows that the Type II is as sociated with
slow outward currents or certain slow inward currents that (para doxically) turn on
when the cell is inhibited [16, 17]; this shows how biophysical structur e is connected
with mathematical structure.
Asecondsetofquestionsconcernswhythe high-dimensionalcoup ledHHequa-
tions can be well approximated by a 1-D map. (In some parameter ra nges, but not
all, this is any excellent approximation). The mathematical issues her e concern
how large subsets of high-dimensional phase space collapse onto wh at is essentially
a one-dimensional space. Ideas similar to those in Section 3.1 are rele vant, but
with diﬀerent biophysics creating the collapse of the trajectories. In this case (and
others) there are many diﬀerent ionic currents, with many diﬀeren t time scales, so
that a given current can be dominant in some portion of the traject ory and then
decrease to zero while others take over; this leads to structure t hat is more com-
plex than that of the traditional “fast-slow” equations, and which is not nearly as
understood. Such reductions to 1-D maps have been used in other investigations of
synchrony [19-21] involving multiple cells and multiple kinds of currents .
3.3. More complex building blocks: Fancier inhibitory cell s
So far, I’vetalked about networkscontainingfast-ﬁringneurons (inhibitory) or
excitatory cells. But there are many diﬀerent kinds of cells in the ner vous system,
with intrinsicand synapticcurrentsthat makethem dynamicallyvery diﬀerentfrom
one another. Once there are more currents with more time scales, it is easier to
create more rhythms with diﬀerent frequency. That is, the diﬀere nces in frequencies
often (but not always) come from some time scales in the interacting currents, and
cannot be scaled away.
The stellate cell of Section 3.2 is an excellent example of currents cre ating
frequencies; in a wide range of parameters, these cells, even witho ut coupling, form
a theta rhythm. Indeed, they are believed to be one of the primary sources of that
rhythm in the hippocampus, which is thought by many to use these rh ythms in
tasks involving learning and recall. As described above, these cells ar e excitatory,
and synchronize when coupled by excitation.
More puzzling are inhibitory cells in the hippocampus that are capable o f
forming theta rhythms as isolated cells with ionic currents similar to th ose in the
stellatecells. Thepuzzleisthatthesecellsdonotcohere(inmodels)u singinhibitory
coupling. (The decay time of inhibition caused by these cells is roughly f our times
longer than the inhibition caused by the fast-ﬁring cells, but neither fast nor this
slower decaying inhibition creates synchrony in models.) So what is pro viding the
coherence seen in the theta rhythm? (The rhythm can be seen in sm all slices that
do not have inputs from other parts of the brain producing theta, so in such a
paradigm, the rhythm must be produced locally.)
One suggestion (Rotstein, Kopell, Whittington, in preparation) is th at the
inhibitory rhythms seen in slice preparations with excitation blocked p harmacolog-
Rhythms of the Nervous System: Mathematical Themes and Variat ions 811
ically depend on both kinds of inhibitory cells discussed, the special on es (called
O-LM cells [22]) and the others. Simulations show that networks of th ese cells can
have the O-LM cells synchronize and I-cells synchronize at a diﬀeren t phase, to
create an inhibitory network with considerably more complexity than interacting
fast-ﬁring cells involved in ING. Again, this can be reduced to a low-dim ensional
map for a minimal network (two O-LM cells, one fast ﬁring I-cell). How ever, the
reduction now requires properties of the currents involved in the O -LM model, in-
cluding the kinetics of the gating variables.
3.4. Interaction of rhythms
Anothersetofmathematicalissuesisassociatedwithtransitionsa mongrhythms.
In general, rhythms slower than gamma (e.g., beta, theta and alpha ) make use of
ionic currents that are active between spikes. These currents ar evoltage-dependent,
so that changes in voltage, in the sub- and super-threshold regime s, can turn on
or oﬀ these currents. Thus, neuromodulators that change the v oltage range of a
neuron (e.g., by changing a leak current) can change which other cu rrents are ac-
tively expressed. In that way, they can cause a switch from one rh ythm to another.
For example, models of the alpha rhythm [20] suggest that this rhyt hm makes use
the inhibition-activated “h-current”; this current is eﬀectively oﬀ line if the voltage
is increased (even below threshold level). Thus, a switch from alpha t o a faster
rhythm (gamma or beta) can be eﬀected by simply making the E-cells o perate in a
moderately higher voltage regime.
These switches can be seen in simulations (Pinto, Jones, Kaper, Kop ell, in
prep.), but are still understood only heuristically. The mathematica l issues are as-
sociated with reduction of dimension methods. In the regime in which t he network
is displaying alpha, there are many more variables that are actively ch anging, no-
tably the gating variables of each of the currents that is important in this rhythm.
When there is a switch to gamma and those currents go oﬀ line, the ph ase space
becomeseﬀectivelysmaller. The mathematicshereinvolvesunderst andinghowthat
phase compression takes place.
A related set of mathematical questions concerns rhythms that a re “nested”,
one within another. For example, the theta rhythm often present s as the envelope
of a series of faster gamma cycles, and the beta rhythm, at least in some mani-
festations, occur with the I-cells ﬁring at a gamma rhythm and the E -cells ﬁring
at the slower beta rhythm, missing some cycles of the inhibitory rhyt hm. The
gamma/beta switch has been understood from a physiological point of view (see
[19] and its references) and has been simulated. The gamma/theta nesting is less
understood, though new data and simulations are providing the phy siological and
heuristic basis for this [22; Rotstein, Kopell, Whittington, in prep.].
4. Large networks
Though there are many more examples of other building blocks, I’m tu rning
812 Nancy Kopell
to issues that do not appear in small network analysis. I’m going to go back to a
very simple building block, but now put many such together. The simple building
block is one E cell, one I-cell, which together can create a gamma rhyt hm.
4.1. Sparse coupling
We now considera networkwith N E-cellsand M I-cells, with randomcou pling
from the E-cells to the I-cells and vica versa. Suppose, for example , there is a
ﬁxed probability of connection in each direction between any pair of E and I cells.
Then the number of inputs to any cell is distributed across the popu lation, leading
to heterogeneity of excitation and inhibition. Is it still possible to get coherent
gammarhythms? Thiscanbeansweredwithmathematicalanalysisus ingthe“theta
neuron” model described above [9]. To understand synchrony in E/ I networks, it
is helpful to understand what each pulse of inhibition does to the pop ulation of
excitatory cells and vica versa. The part in which both probability and dynamical
systems play a large role is the eﬀect of a pulse of inhibition on a populat ion. The
“rivers” referred to above in Section 3.1 create synchronization if the inputs to cells
have no variance, but with variation in the size of the inputs, there is a spread in
the times of the outputs. This can be accurately computed using fe atures of the
dynamicsandprobabilitytheory. Similarly, butwith lessaccuracy,on ecancompute
the the eﬀect of variation of inputs on the spike times of the receivin g population
due to a pulse of excitation. The results lead to unintutive conclusion s, e.g., that
increasing the strength of the inhibition (which strengthens the sy nchronizing eﬀect
of the rivers) does not reduce the desynchronizing eﬀects of ran dom connectivity.
Furthermore, tight synchrony can be obtained even with extreme ly sparse coupling
provided that variance in the size of the inputs is small.
4.2. Loss of coherence
The above analyses can be put together to understand synchron y of “PING”.
However, they leave only partially answered many questions about la rger networks.
One such question, which is central to understanding how the asse mblies of neurons
are created and destroyed, is the circumstances under which the synchrony falls
apart, i.e., what modulations of cells and/or synapses will lead to loss o f coherence
of the gamma rhythm. The above analysis shows that too large a var iation in size
of inputs to diﬀerent cells of the same population can be fatal. Similar p henomena
occur with too much variation in drive or intrinsic currents. There ar e less obvi-
ous constraints that are understood from working with smaller net works described
above. From those, it is possible to see that ING and PING operate in diﬀerent pa-
rameter regimes: the ﬁring times of the population in ING are govern ed by the bias
of the I-cells (as well as the decay time of the inhibition); in PING, the inhibitory
cells are more passive until driven by the E-cells, and the timing comes from bias of
the E-cells (as well as decay of inhibition). This means that the mecha nism of co-
herence can switch between ING and PING by changing relative excit ability of the
two populations. Changing the strengths of the I-E and E-I synap ses can also get
Rhythms of the Nervous System: Mathematical Themes and Variat ions 813
the population (large or small) out of the regime in which the E-cells syn chronize
the I-cells, and vica versa.
A more mysterious issue that cannot be addressed within minimal net works is
howthesize ofthe sub-populationsrespondingonagivencycleaﬀec tsthe coherence
on the next cycle and the numbers of cells participating, especially wh en there is
some heterogeneity in the network. E.g., as the number of inhibitory neurons ﬁring
in a cycle changes, it changes the total inhibition to the E-cells, which changes the
number of E-cells that are ready to ﬁre when inhibition wears oﬀ, and before the
next bout of inhibition. If the amount of inhibition gets too small, or inh ibition
gets too dispersed, the coherence can rapidly die. Without taking in to account
the trajectories of each of the large number of cells, it is likely that s ome possibly
probabilistic account of the numbers of cells spiking per cycle can give some insight
into the dynamical mechanisms surrounding failure of coherence.
Such a reduction has been successfully used in a diﬀerent setting, in volving the
long-distance coherence of two populations of heterogeneous ce lls. In this case, if
the populations are each minimal (one E/I pair) for each site, there is 1-D map that
describes the synchronization, with the variable the timing between the E and I
sites [19] . For large and heterogeneous networks, the synchron ization (within some
parameter regimes) can be described by a 3-dimensional map, in whic h the ﬁrst
variable is the time between the ﬁrst spikes of a cycle in the two E-cell populations,
and the others are the fraction of I-cells ﬁring on that cycle in each of the two I-cell
populations (McMillen and Kopell, in prep.).
Related work has been done from a diﬀerent perspective, starting with asyn-
chronous networks and asking how the asynchrony can lose stabilit y [23-25]. Work
using multiple time scales to address the formation of “clusters” whe n synchrony
fails is in [26].
4.3. Noise, PING, and frequency control
One of the main diﬀerences between ING and PING is the diﬀerence in r obust-
ness. Small amounts of heterogeneity of any kind make ING cohere nce fall apart
dramatically [4,13]. By contrast, PING is tolerant to large ranges of h eterogene-
ity. The “ping-pong” mechanism of PING is also able to produce frequ encies that
cover a much wider range than the ING mechanism, which is constrain ed by loss
of coherence to lie in the gamma range of approximately 30-80 Hz [4,13 ]. Since
many versions of gamma seen in experiments are of the PING variety , this raises
the question of what constrains the PING rhythms to stay in the ga mma frequency
range.
A possible answer to this comes from simulations. C. Borgers, D. McM illen
and I found that heterogeneity, unless extreme, would not disrup t the PING coher-
ence. However, a very small amount of noise (with ﬁxed amplitude an d poisson-
distributed times) could entirely destroy coherence of the PING, p rovided the latter
had a frequency below approximately 30 Hz; if the same noise is introd uced when
the networkis in the gammarange, the behavioris onlyslightly pertur bed. Further-
more, the ability to withstand the noise is related to adding some I-I c onnections,
as in ING. A heuristic explanation is that, at low frequencies, the inhib ition to the
814 Nancy Kopell
I-cells (which has a time constant around 10ms) wears oﬀ before th e excitation from
the E-cells causes these cells to spike. Thus, those cells hang aroun d the threshold
for signiﬁcant amounts of time, and are therefore vulnerable to be ing pushed over
threshold by noise. The mathematics has yet to be understood rigo rously.
5. Mathematics and clues to function
The mathematical questions are themselves interesting, but the f ull richness of
the scientiﬁc endeavor comes from the potential for understand ing how the rhythms
generatedby the brain might be used in sensoryprocessing, motor coordinationand
cognition. We are still at the outer edges of such an investigation, b ut there are
many clues from animal behavior, physiology and mathematics. Work done with
EEGs(see, e.g., reviews[27,28])has shown that many cognitiveand mo tortasks are
associated with speciﬁc rhythms appearing in diﬀerent parts of the tasks. Gamma
is often associated with attention, awareness and perception, be ta with preparation
for motor activies and high-order cognitive tasks, theta with learn ing and recall and
alpha with quiet awareness (there are several diﬀerent versions o f alpha in diﬀerent
parts of the brain and found in diﬀerent circumstances). Work don e in whole
animalsandin slicepreparationsaregivingclues to the underlyingphys iologyofthe
rhythms, and how various neuromodulators change the rhythms, e.g., [14]. Much
of the math done so far has concerned how the networks produce their rhythms
from their ionic currents and connectivity, and has not directly add ressed function.
However, the issues of function are starting to be addressed in te rms of how the
dynamics of networks aﬀects the computational properties of th e latter.
One of the potential functions for these rhythms is the creation o f “cell as-
semblies”, temporary sets of neurons that ﬁre synchronously. T hese assemblies are
believed to be important in distributed processing; they enhance th e eﬀect of the
synchronized pulses downstream, and provide a substrate for ch anges in synapses
that help to encode experience. (“Cells that ﬁre together wire tog ether.”) Simula-
tions show, and help to explain, why gamma rhythms have especially go od prop-
erties for creating cells assemblies, and repressing cells with lower ex citatbility or
input [29]. Furthermore, the changesin synapsesknown to occur d uring gammacan
facilitate the creation of the beta rhythm (see [19] for reference s), which appears
in higher-order processing. Mathematical analysis shows that the beta rhythm is
more eﬀective for creating synchrony over distances where the c onduction time is
longer. Thus, we can understand the spontaneous gamma-beta s witch seen in vari-
ous circumstances (see [19] and [29]) as creating cell assemblies (du ring the gamma
portion), using the synaptic changes to get cell assemblies encode d in the beta
rhythm, and then using the beta rhythm to form highly distributed c ell assemblies.
The new ﬂood of data, plus the new insights from the mathematics, a re open-
ing up many avenues for mathematical research related to rhythm s and function.
A large class of such questions concerns how networks that are dis playing given
rhythmsﬁlterinputswith spatio-temporalstructure, andhowth is aﬀectsthechang-
ing cell assemblies. This question is closely related to the central and controversial
questions of what is the neural code and how does it operate. Thes e questions will
Rhythms of the Nervous System: Mathematical Themes and Variat ions 815
likely require new techniques to combine dynamical systems and prob ability, new
ways to reduce huge networks to ones amenable to analysis, and ne w ideas within
dynamical systems itself, e.g., to understand switches as global bif urcations; these
are large and exciting challenges to the mathematical community.
References
[1] C. Koch and I. Segev, Methods in Neuronal Modeling , MIT Press, Cambridge
MA., 1998.
[2] P.F. Pinsky and J. Rinzel, Intrinsic and network rhythmogenesis in a reduced
Traub model, J. Comput. Neurosci. 1(1994), 39–60.
[3] X.J. Wang and J. Rinzel, Alternating and synchronous rhythms in r eciprocally
inhibitory model neurons, Neural Comput .4(1992), 84–97.
[4] J. White, C. Chow, J. Ritt, C. Soto-Trevino and N. Kopell, Synchr oniza-
tion and oscillatory dynamics in heterogeneous, mutually inhibited neu rons,
J. Comput. Neurosci. 5(1998), 5–16.
[5] D. Terman, N. Kopell and A. Bose, Dynamics of two mutually couple d slow
inhibitory neurons, Physica D 117(1998), 241–275.
[6] C. van Vreeswijk, L.F. Abbott, G.B. Ermentrout, When inhibition, not exci-
tation, synchronizes neural ﬁring, J. Comput. Neurosci. 1(1994), 313–321.
[7] N. Kopell and G.B. Ermentrout, Mechanisms of phase-locking and frequency
control in pairs of coupled neural oscillators, in Handbook on Dynamical Sys-
tems, vol. 2,Toward Applications . Ed. B. Fiedler, Elsevier (2002), 3–54.
[8] G.B. Ermentrout and N. Kopell, Parabolic bursting in an excitable sy stem
coupled with a slow oscillation, SIAM J. Appl. Math. 46(1986), 233–253.
[9] C. Borger and N. Kopell, Synchronization in network of excitator y and in-
hibitory neurons with sparse, random connectivity, to appear in Neural Com-
put.
[10] F. Diener, Proprietes asymptotiques des ﬂeuves, C.R. Acad. Sci Paris 302
(1985), 55–58.
[11] C. Chow, J. White, J. Ritt, and N. Kopell, Frequency control in s ynchronous
networks of inhibitory neurons, J. Comput. Neurosci. ,5(1998), 407–420.
[12] M.A. Whittington, R.D. Traub and J. Jeﬀerys, Synchronized osc illation in
interneuron networks driven by metabotropic glutamate recepto r activation,
Nature373(1995), 612–615.
[13] X.-J. Wang and G. Buzsaki, Gamma oscillation by synaptic inhibition in a
hippocampal interneuronal network model, J. Neurosci. 16(1996), 6402–6413.
[14] R.D.Traub,J.G.T.JeﬀerysandM.A.Whittington, Fast oscillations in Cortical
Circuits, MIT Press, Cambridge MA, 1999.
[15] M.A. Whittington, R.D. Traub, N. Kopell, G.B. Ermentrout and E.H. Buhl,
Inhibition-basedrhythms: Experimentalandmathematicalobser vationonnet-
work dynamics, Int. J. of Psychophysiology 38(2000), 315–336.
[16] G.B. Ermentrout, M. Pascal and B. Gutkin, The eﬀects of spike frequency
adaptation and negative feedback on the synchronization of neur al oscillators,
Neural Comput. 13(2001), 1285–1310.
816 Nancy Kopell
[17] C. Acker, N. Kopell and J. White, Synchronization of strongly c oupled excita-
tory neurons: relating network behavior to biophysics, to appear inJ. Comput.
Neurosci.
[18] G.B. Ermentrout, Type I membranes, phase resetting curves and synchrony,
Neural Comput. 8(1996), 879–1001.
[19] N. Kopell, G.B. Ermentrout, M. Whittington and R.D. Traub, Gamm a
rhythms and beta rhythms have diﬀerent synchronization proper ties,Proc.
Nat. Acad. Sci. USA ,97(2000), 1867–1872.
[20] S.R.Jones,D.Pinto,T.KaperandN.Kopell,Alpha-frequency rhythmsdesyn-
chronize over long cortical distances: a modeling study, J. Comput. Neurosci. ,
9(2000), 271–291.
[21] T.LoFaroandN. Kopell, Timing regulationin anetworkreducedfr omvoltage-
gated equations to a one-dimensional map, J. Math Biol. 38(1999), 479–533.
[22] M.J. Gillies, R.D. Traub, F.E.N LeBeau, C.H. Davies, T. Gloveli, E.H. Buh l
and M.A. Whittington, Stratum oriens interneurons temporally coor dinate
atropine-resistant theta oscillations in hippocampal area CA1, to a ppear in
J. Neurophysiol .
[23] D. Golomb and B. Hansel, The number of synaptic inputs and sync hrony of
large sparse neuronal networks, Neural Comp. 12(2000), 1095–1139.
[24] D. Hansel and G. Mato, Existence and stability of persistent st ates in large
neuronal networks, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86(2001), 4175–4178.
[25] N. Brunel, Dynamics of sparsely connected networks of excita tory and in-
hibitory spiking neurons, J. Comput. Neurosci. 8(2000), 183–208.
[26] J. Rubin and D. Terman, Geometric analysis of population rhythm s in synap-
tically coupled neuronal networks, Neural Comp .12(2000), 597–645.
[27] S.F Farmer, Rhythmicity, synchronization and binding in human an d primate
motor systems, J. Physiol. 509(1998), 3–14.
[28] C. Tallon-Baudry and O. Bertrand, Oscillatory gamma activity in h umans and
its role in object representation, Trends in Cognitive Neurosci. 3(1999), 151–
162.
[29] M. Olufsen, MA. Whittington, M. Camperi and N. Kopell, New func tions
for the gamma rhythm: Population tuning and preprocessing, to ap pear in
J.Comput. Neurosci.
