arXiv:cond-mat/9708214v1  [cond-mat.dis-nn]  28 Aug 1997The Modular Structure of Kauﬀman Networks
U. Bastolla1,2and G. Parisi1
October 2, 2018
1Dipartimento di Fisica, Universit` a “La Sapienza”, P.le Aldo Moro 2, I- 00185 Roma Italy
2HLRZ, Forschungszentrum J¨ ulich, D-52425 J¨ ulich Germany
Keywords: Disordered Systems, Genetic Regulatory Networks,
Random Boolean Networks, Cellular Automata
Abstract
This is the second paper of a series of two about the structura l properties that
inﬂuence the asymptotic dynamics of Random Boolean Network s. Here we study the
functionally independent clusters in which the relevant el ements, introduced and stud-
ied in our ﬁrstpaper [3], are subdivided. We show that the pha se transition in Random
Boolean Networks can also be described as a percolation tran sition. The statistical
properties of the clusters of relevant elements (that we cal lmodules) give an insight
on the scaling behavior of the attractors of the critical net works that, according to
Kauﬀman, have a biological analogy as a model of genetic regul atory systems.
1 Introduction
Kauﬀman networks are networks of randomly interconnected bina ry elements under recip-
rocal regulation. Every node is controlled by Kelements extracted at random in the set of
the nodes. The boolean control rules, which associate a binary valu e to every conﬁguration
of the controlling elements, are also extracted at random at the be ginning and kept ﬁxed
during the evolution of the system.
The relevant parameter of the distribution of the control rules is ρ, the probability that
two diﬀerent conﬁgurations of the controlling elements produce a d iﬀerent output. For every
value of the bare connectivity Kthere is a critical value of ρ,ρc= 1/K, which separates a
frozen phase (small ρ) from a chaotic one (large ρ). According to Kauﬀman [1], this model
reproduces on its critical line some features of the genetic regulat ory systems acting in the
cells.
In the preceding paper [3] we deﬁned the relevant elements of Kauﬀ man networks, which
are the only elements that inﬂuence the asymptotic dynamics, and w e measured their dis-
tribution. We refer to that paper for the description of the prope rties of the model, of
the distribution of the relevant elements and of the relations betwe en the number of rele-
vant elements and the properties of the limit cycles of the dynamics. In the present paper
1
we are going to describe how such elements are spontaneously orga nized into dynamically
disconnected clusters that we will call modules.
It is known [7] that some of the elements in the network evolve to a co nstant state
independent of the initial conﬁguration and don’t take part to the a symptotic dynamics.
The relevant elements are the elements whose state is not constan t and that control at least
onerelevant element. Thus every relevant element must becontro lledby atleast onerelevant
element (eventually itself) and must control at least one of them (e ventually itself). It is
then clear that loops of relevant elements must exist.
The set of relevant elements can thus be partitioned into diﬀerent c lusters, that we call
modules, deﬁned by the following equivalence relation: two relevant e lements belong to the
same module if one of them controls the other one. It is clear from th is deﬁnition that
elements in diﬀerent modules cannot communicate among each other after a transient time:
thus the dynamics induce spontaneously upon the network a cluste rization of the relevant
elements. The number of the limit cycles and their lengths depend only on this modular
organization.
As expected, the statistical properties of the modules are very d iﬀerent in the two dy-
namical regimes of the model.
•In the frozen phase the number of relevant elements remains ﬁnite in the inﬁnite size
limit [4, 3]. In this case, on the ground of the argument presented in [3 ], we expect that
the modules are, in the inﬁnite size limit, loops of eﬀective connectivity exactly equal
to 1 (i.e., every relevant element is under the control of only one relevant e lement),
and that the distribution of modules and, consequently, the numbe r and the length of
the attractors depend in this phase only on the parameter c=Kρ <1.
•In the chaotic phase the number of relevant elements is proportion al toN, and the
number of irrelevant elements tends to zero very fast as the bare connectivity increases
(already for K= 3 andρ= 1/2 the fraction of irrelevant elements is about 0 .01 for an
inﬁnite system). The set of the relevant elements is fully connected in the inﬁnite size
limit, where the number of modules tends to 1 also for K= 3 andρ= 1/2, as we shall
see below. Nevertheless, in chaotic systems with low connectivity so me signatures of
a modular organization are present as a ﬁnite size eﬀect.
•At the border between the two phases, the critical line shows an int eresting behav-
ior. Here the number of relevant elements scales as√
N,i.e.the number of relevant
elements increases with system size but they become more and more sparse. In this
situation we expect that also the number of modules grows with syst em size, and that
is actually what we observe in our simulations. The increase of the ave rage number
of modules is slow, apparently logarithmic in N, but it is responsible of important
eﬀects, such as the fact that the average weights of attraction basins tends to zero in
the inﬁnite size limit, or that the distributions of the length and the nu mber of the
limit cycles become broader and broader as Nincreases.
Thus the phase transition in Kauﬀman model is reminiscent of a perco lation transition.
Below the threshold, the set of relevant elements is divided into a ﬁnit e number of ﬁnite
clusters. Above, it is completely connected. In critical systems, a n inﬁnite number of
2
clusters is present. In this case it is an open problem whether the pr obability that all the
relevant elements are connected tends to zero or to a ﬁnite limit in th e inﬁnite size limit.
Derrida and Stauﬀer were the ﬁrst ones to notice the analogy with p ercolation theory
for a lattice version of Kauﬀman model [5]. The study of the modular o rganization shows
that the analogy with percolation theory remains pertinent also in th e model with random
neighbors.
We start presenting our numerical results from the statistical an alysis of the divisors of
cycle lengths (section 2), which allows the simplest numerical investig ation of the modular
organization. Section 3 isabout thedirect measure ofthe distribut ion ofthe number andsize
of modules, both in the chaotic phase and on the critical line. In sect ion 4 we show how the
number ofmodules andtheeﬀective connectivity dependonthenum ber ofrelevant elements.
A simple argument predicts the qualitative behavior of these quantit ies in agreement with
numerical results. Section 5 concerns the relation between the nu mber of modules and the
length and number of the limit cycles, and section 6 deals with the distr ibution of attraction
basins weights, interpreting results that we presented in [8]. An ove rall discussion concludes
the paper.
2 Divisors of cycle length
2.1 Analytic considerations in the frozen phase
The distributions of the length of the cycles in critical networks ( K= 2,ρ= 1/2) and
supercritical networks close to the phase transition ( K= 3,ρ= 1/2) show an oscillatory
behavior: the cycles of even length are more frequent than the od d ones (in other words, the
closing probability is larger when a cycle of even length is reached) [6]. F igure 1 shows the
period distribution for a network on the critical line, with K= 4 and ρ= 1/4.
This is what should be expected if the relevant elements are subdivide d into independent
modules. In this case an attractor is the composition of the local cy cles of the diﬀerent
modules, and its length is the least common multiple of the lengths of th e local cycles, so
that if at least one of the modules has a local cycle of even length also the global cycle
will be even. Studying in more detail the statistical properties of th e numbers that are
integer divisors of cycle length it is thus possible to test this hypothe sis and to obtain
qualitative informations about the distribution of the modules, while t he direct inspection
of the modules is numerically more cumbersome (with this method it is en ough to simulate
one or two trajectories in every network, while for the direct stud y of the relevant elements
and of the modules several hundreds of trajectories must be simu lated).
We simulated two large systems in the chaotic phase and on the critica l line, generating
thousands of sample networks and two trajectories on each of th em. For any small integer l
up tolmaxwe measured the probability to ﬁnd an attractor with length multiple o fl,Pd(l),
and, only for those networks where the two trajectories had rea ched diﬀerent attractors, we
measured the conditional probability that the length of the second cycle is multiple of lgiven
that the length of the ﬁrst one is multiple of l(we call this quantity Pd(l|l)). We measured
such quantities for diﬀerent sets of networks, deﬁned by the con dition that both cycles are
shorter than a threshold length L0, and studied how the results vary as a function of L0.
3
P
t1 5 10 50 10010ù-410ù-310ù-210ù-1
Figure 1: Probability to ﬁnd a cycle with period tin a random network with K= 2,ρ= 1/2
andN= 120. The dotted line is the probability that the transient time i s equal to t.
4
As discussed in [3], there is a positive correlation between the length o f the cycles and the
number of relevant elements in a network, so that we expect that t he condition imposed on
the length of the cycles selects networks with less and less relevant elements as L0decreases.
2.2 Critical system
Wediscuss separately theresults obtainedfor thecritical andfor the chaotic system, starting
from the former one, which is a system with 2160 elements and param etersK= 4 and
ρ=ρc= 1/4.
Inthis case themodular organizationisvery evident. In thecase of a RandomMap, Pd(l)
is proportional to 1 /l. In the present case, instead, we have to distinguish between valu es of
lwhich are prime numbers and values which are not prime. For lprime the probability Pd(l)
has initially a value larger than 1 /l(for instance, Pd(2) = 0.87 when cycles shorter than 512
are selected), but then decreases faster than l−1. The decrease become faster when shorter
cycles are selected. This fact is consistent with the hypothesis of t he modular organization,
and, within this interpretation, shows that the probability to ﬁnd a m odule with local cycle
larger than ldecays faster than 1 /l, and even faster if the number of relevant elements is
small.
Iflis not prime, on the other hand, Pd(l) is larger than for the prime numbers nearby,
and it is usually close to the product of the probability of its prime fact ors (see ﬁgure 2).
This is a strong hint to interpret these prime factors as the length o f the local cycles of
individual modules
The eﬀect of changing the threshold on cycle length, L0, is shown in ﬁgure 3. For a ﬁxed
l, the probability to ﬁnd a cycle whose length is a multiple of lincreases, reach a maximum
value and then decreases. Since the abscissa can be related to an in creasing number of
relevant elements, a possible interpretation of this behavior is that the number of modules
ﬁrst increases with the number of relevant elements, then reache s a maximum value and
ultimately decreases. We will see in section 4 that this is just what hap pens.
At last, the condition that we already found in the same network a cy cle multiple of
llargely improves the probability to ﬁnd another cycle multiple of l, consistently with the
modular interpretation. This probability decreases when we select n etworks characterized by
longer attractors (this can be interpreted as another indication o f the fact that the number
of modules may decrease as the number of relevant elements increa ses).
2.3 Chaotic system
The network that we examined is close to the critical phase: K= 3,ρ= 1/2,N= 100. This
is a very large size concerning the duration of the simulation, since in t he chaotic phase the
length of the cycles increases exponentially with system size, but it s till shows important
ﬁnite size eﬀects. We think that the signs of the modular organizatio n that we observed
can disappear in an inﬁnite system, since this signs decrease when we select networks with
longer attractors, i.e.with more relevant elements, and in an inﬁnite system the fraction of
relevant elements tends to 0 .99. A direct study of the modules for smaller systems shows in
fact that the average number of modules tends to 1 in this limit (see n ext section).
5
lPd(l)
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 20 300.010.050.100.501.00
Figure 2: Probability to ﬁnd a cycle of length multiple of l, wherelis a prime number, in
critical networks with K= 4,ρ= 1/4andN= 2160. The dashed line represents 1/l. The
isolated point above that line shows the same probability fo rl= 8.
6
L0Pd(l|L0)
Figure 3: Probability to ﬁnd a cycle of length multiple of 2 (*) and 3 ( ♦) restricted to the
set of cycles shorter than L0, as a function of L0, in critical networks with K= 4,ρ= 1/4
andN= 2160.
7
Also in this case, however, the probability to ﬁnd a global period which is multiple of l
decreases faster than 1 /lwhenlis a prime number, but the diﬀerence from 1 /lis smaller
than in the previous case (in networks with attractors shorter th an 50 steps, its value is 0 .70
forl= 2 and 0 .29 forl= 3). Also this probability is larger when lmay be decomposed
into prime factors. However this features tend to disappear when larger cycles are selected,
andPd(l) approaches 1 /lwhen the threshold L0increases, thus indicating that the modular
organization tends to disappear when the number of relevant eleme nts increases.
Correlations between the divisors of diﬀerent cycles on the same ne twork seem to be
present (the conditional probability Pd(l|l) is larger than Pd(l)), but they are of little signif-
icance (the diﬀerence between the two probabilities is, at most, of t he order of two or three
standard deviations) and our simulations can not even prove that s uch correlations exist.
In any case the correlations, if any, are much smaller than in the crit ical system, and they
appear to decrease when networks with longer attractors are se lected.
3 Distribution of modules
In this section we deal with a direct study of the number of modules. Before presenting the
results that we obtained, however, we shall describe brieﬂy our alg orithm, also in order to
give an operative deﬁnition of the modules.
The ﬁrst step, as it is discussed in [3], consists in identifying the stable elements. To
this aim we simulate 300 trajectories for each of the networks that we generate. The stable
elements are those ones that reach the same stable state in all the diﬀerent runs. The set of
the unstable elements is then reduced to the relevant elements alon e (the ones that control
at least one relevant element), and in this process the irrelevant co nnections are eliminated
(the connection between aandbis irrelevant if the response function does not depend on the
state ofawhen all the stable values of the stable elements have been substitu ted in it, i.e.
if the function reduced to the unstable arguments alone is a consta nt function of the state
ofa). Now every relevant element receives a diﬀerent label, and the follo wing procedure is
iterated: if either acontrolsborbcontrolsa, and their labels are diﬀerent, their labels are
set equal to the smaller one, and all the labels equal to the one that is changed are set to
the same value. We check that no label is changed more than once in a n iteration. When no
label changes anymore the iterations are interrupted. At this poin t to every diﬀerent label
corresponds a diﬀerent module, and we count their number and the ir size.
3.1 Chaotic systems
We start to present results relative to the chaotic phase, where t he existence of a modular
organization appears only as a ﬁnite size eﬀect. We investigated num erically systems not
far from the critical line, with K= 3,ρ= 1/2 andNcomprised between 20 and 75. For
such systems, the probability to generate a network with more tha n one module tends to
zero roughly as 1 /N.
Comparing this result with the analysis of the divisors of cycle length ( section 2) we see
that the modular organization is not the only explanation for the high frequency of even
periods, which would be smaller if it were due only to the presence of diﬀ erent modules. It is
8
possible however that some other structures generalizing the not ion of module can give the
same eﬀect and are present with larger probability. For example, we can deﬁne in-going and
outgoing submodules as sets of relevant elements that do not, res pectively, receive from or
send to the outside any relevant signals. The length of a local cycle is then multiple of the
period of all the in-going submodules, and the situation described in t he previous section
may occur because of the submodules. Another structure that c ould play a role is that of
cycle-depending modules. Globally stable elements are deﬁned as the elements that reach
the same ﬁxed state independently on the initial conﬁguration. The elements stable on a
cycle are a subset of those, and are deﬁned as the elements whose value does not change
along the cycle. Thus the network can be decomposed into cycle-de pending modules that
do not communicate between each other when the system is on the a ttractor. Once again,
the period of the attractor is the least common multiple of the period s of all cycles of the
partial modules that compose it. Or it may be that the statistical pr operties of the divisors
of cycle length do not depend on the presence of modules.
However, it is clear that the modular organization tends to disappea r in the inﬁnite size
limit.
3.2 Critical systems
The distributions of the number of modules in critical systems with K= 4 and ρ= 1/4
have a maximum corresponding to a single module and then decrease r oughly exponentially,
but with a rate that becomes slower and slower as system size increa ses (ﬁgure 4). The
probability to ﬁnd a single module, or no module at all (this means that a ll the elements
are stable) decreases with system size, while the probabilities to ﬁnd 2 or more modules
increases. It is not clear whether the probability of networks with o nly one module tends to
zero or to a ﬁnite limit. The average number of modules increases with system size. T, and
the best ﬁt is logarithmic:
∝angbracketleftNmod∝angbracketright ≈0.40+0.39logN. (1)
We prefer the logarithmic ﬁt to a power law with a small exponent, also compatible with
our data, for two reasons: ﬁrst, because the inclusion of the larg estNvalue modiﬁes the ﬁt
parameters by 5 percent in the ﬁrst case and by 10 percent in the s econd one, and second
because at the “critical point” K= 1,ρ= 1 the analogy between the modules and the cycles
of a Random Map shows that the average number of modules grows lo garithmically with
system size in this case [4]. This point is not a real critical point since it is not at the border
between two phases (with K= 1 only the frozen phase is possible), but still the analogy
with it can give useful indications.
Mostofthemoduleshaveonlyoneelement, andthedistributionofth esizeofthemodules
decreases monotonically. The probability to ﬁnd a module with 1, 2 or 3 elements depends
very little on the system size N. On the other hand, this probability increases with Nfor
modules of large size (ﬁgure 5), consistently with what we saw in [3]: th e number of relevant
elements, which is the sum of the sizes of all the modules, scales as√
Non the critical line.
9
0 2 4 6
m10−410−310−210−1100Pm(m)
N = 120
N = 240
N = 480
N = 720
N = 1280
N = 1600
Figure 4: Distribution of the number of modules in a random network at t he critical point
K= 4andρ= 1/4.Nis ranging from 120 to 1600.
10
RP
Figure 5: Distribution of the number of modules with Rrelevant elements, at the critical
pointK= 4,ρ= 1/4;Nis respectively equal to 120 (squares), 240 (X) and 480 ( ♦).
11
4 Eﬀective connectivity
In this section we examine how the number of modules depends on the number of relevant
elements. A useful notion to understand this relation is the eﬀectiv e connectivity of the
network. Also in this case the simulations were done with critical netw orks with K= 4 nd
ρ= 1/4.
We plot in ﬁg. 6 the average number of modules as a function of the nu mber of relevant
elements in the network, R, for systems of diﬀerent sizes. This quantity shows a non mono-
tonic behavior: the number of modules increases with Rat the beginning, then it reaches a
maximum and starts to decrease towards the value 1.
The plot of the average number of relevant elements as a function o f the number of
modules (ﬁgure 7) contains a similar information. Contrarily to the na ive expectation, the
largest number of relevant elements is attained in networks with only one module. It seems
that then the curve reaches a minimum and starts to increase, but we have the networks
with such a large number of modules are very rare and we can not mak e any signiﬁcant
statement about this point.
It is not diﬃcult to explain qualitatively this behavior. At this end we use the same
argument that we used in [3] to estimate the scale of the number of r elevant elements. We
suppose to add a new element to a network with Rrelevant element. If the new added
element happens to be relevant, three situations are possible:
1. The new relevant element is added to a previously existing module an d the number of
modules does not change;
2. The new relevant element constitutes a new module itself and the n umber of modules
increases by one unit;
3. The new relevant element connects two modules and the number o f modules decreases
by one unit.
WhenNis large all other possibilities can be neglected. The situation is trivial in the
frozen phase, where an asymptotic (for large N) distribution of the relevant elements is
reached and all the three cases above have negligible probability, an d in the chaotic phase,
where only one module is present in systems of large size, but it is very interesting on
the critical line, since the properties of the attractors vary acco rding to which of the three
situations is the typical one.
To understand how the number of modules depends on Ron the critical line, we have to
compare case 2 and case 3. If, for a given value of R, the second case prevails, the number
of modules increases with R. In the other case, it decreases. The probability of case 2
should not depend on R, while the probability of case 3 is proportional to/summationtext
ininj, where
niis the size of module iand the sum runs over diﬀerent modules. When Rincreases, we
should expect this quantity to increase so that case 3 prevails. The quantity that allows to
understand quantitatively the situation is the average rescaled siz e of a module, deﬁned as
S2=/angbracketleftBigg/summationdisplay
in2
i//parenleftBigg/summationdisplay
ini/parenrightBigg2/angbracketrightBigg
. (2)
12
10−210−1100101
r=R/N1/20.01.02.03.0<m>N = 240
N = 480
N = 1280
N = 1600
Figure 6: Average number of modules in networks with Rrelevant nodes as a function of
r=R/N1/2at the critical point K= 4,ρ= 1/4.
13
1 2 3 4 5
m0.020.040.060.080.0100.0<R>N = 120
N = 240
N = 480
N = 780
N = 1280
N = 1600
Figure 7: Average number of relevant elements in networks with mmodules at the critical
pointK= 4,ρ= 1/4.
14
If this quantity is large (close to 1) case 2 prevails also for large value s ofR=/summationtext
ini,
otherwise case 3 is the prevailing one.
This argument is supported by the study of the average number of relevant connections1
in the network, that we called the eﬀective connectivity of the network. In critical networks,
this quantity is much smaller than the bare connectivity, K, and tends to 1 as a power law
whenNincreases. We are interested to the behavior of Keffas a function of the number of
relevant elements inthenetwork (inotherwords, Keff(R)isaconditioned average, restricted
to the set of networks with exactly Rrelevant elements).
For large Rthis function is asymptotic to a straight line with intercept close to 1 ( see
ﬁgure 8)2. It holds:
Keff(R)≈a(N)R+b(N), (3)
where the parameter adecreases as a power law: a(N)≈1.7N−0.93, andb(N) tends to 1
from above (every relevant element must have at least one relevan t connection, so that Keff
can not be less than 1).
This is very close to what we expect on the basis of the above argume nt [3]. We expect
that the conditional probability that the new element has two releva nt connections, given
that it is a relevant element, is proportional to R/N2. This is a quantity of order 1 /N, so this
argument predicts a(N)∝1/N, to be compared with our best numerical ﬁt a(N)∝N−0.93.
From this argument, we would expect also that Keff=b(N)+∝angbracketleftR∝angbracketrighta(N) is equal to 1 plus a
term vanishing as 1 /√
N. It turns out, however, that the correction decreases as N−0.3: this
discrepancy is due to the term b(N), and we don’t have a good explanation for it.
Thebehavioroftheeﬀective connectivity andthatofthenumber o fmodulesasafunction
ofRshowtheexistence ofacrossover between twosituationsreminisc ent ofthetwo phasesas
the number of relevant elements changes along the critical line. For smallRwe ﬁnd networks
with small eﬀective connectivity: most of the modules are loops wher e each relevant element
has only one connection, as it is typical in the frozen phase. To the o pposite side, where R
is large, the networks are much more connected and there are few modules. This situation
is similar to what happens in chaotic networks, but on the critical line o nly a ﬁnite number
of elements have more than 1 connection in the inﬁnite size limit.
We thus expect that the properties of the attractors change wid ely with the number of
relevant elements, from a situation reminiscent of the frozen phas e to a situation reminiscent
of the chaotic phase. We dedicate the rest of this paper to describ e how the properties of
the attractors are inﬂuenced by the properties of the modules.
5 Attractors and modules
1In this context, we say that element ahas a connection with element bonly ifais controlled by b, and
not ifbis controlled by a.
2Of course, Keffshould saturate to a value smaller than Kwhen all elements are relevant, but such
networks occur with negligible probability on the critical line.
15
0.0 5.0 10.0 15.0
r0.01.02.03.04.0KeffN = 120
N = 240
N = 480
N = 780
N = 1280
N = 1600
Figure 8: Eﬀective connectivity in networks with Rrelevant nodes as a function of r=
R/N1/2at the critical point K= 4,ρ= 1/4.
16
5.1 Simply connected modules
We saw in the previous section that the eﬀective connectivity of crit ical and frozen systems
tends to 1 in the inﬁnite size limit. This means that most of the elements receive and
send only one relevant signal. Thus simply connected modules play an im portant role in
critical networks, and are found with probability one in the frozen p hase. Such modules
were analytically studied by Flyvbjerg and Kjaer in the case of K= 1 networks [4]. Here
we recall for completeness their properties, adding some more info rmation.
A simply connected module is a loop of relevant elements i= 1,···l, such that the node
i−1 controls node ithrough the Boolean function fi(σ) (we assume periodic boundary
conditions). There are only two kinds of non-constant Boolean fun ctions of one Boolean
argument: tautology ( f(σ) =σ) and contradiction ( f(σ) =σ).
The number and length of the cycles of such modules do not depend o n the details of
the distribution of the Boolean functions, but only on the parity of t he number of negative
functions [4]. All the 2lconﬁgurations of the module belong to some cycle of length equal
to an integer divisor of l(if the number of negative functions is even) or of 2 l(if it is odd):
in fact, after at most lsteps in the ﬁrst case, and 2 lsteps in the second one, every initial
conﬁguration is reproduced. This is the ﬁrst important property: the length of the cycles
increases only linearly with the size of the module.
The number gl(m) of cycles of length min a module of size lis easily found. First, it
is easy to see that gl(m) does not depend on l. In fact, let us assume an even number of
negative functions. A module made out of lelements may be thought of as the repetition of
kmodules made of melements, as mmust be an integer divisor of l=km. But for all the
initial conﬁgurations whose periodicity is mthe dynamics is independent on the value of k;
on the other hand, the conﬁgurations that are not periodic in spac e can not be reproduced
aftermsteps. For an odd number of negative functions the argument is ex actly the same,
but thekmodules of size mcan be equal only if kis odd. Thus gl(m) depends only on m
and on the parity of the number of negative functions, that we sha ll denote by a superscript:
(0) to indicate even, and (1) to indicate odd. It holds
/summationdisplay
{m|l/minteger }mg(0)(m) = 2l, (4)
/summationdisplay
{m|l/modd}2mg(0)(2m) = 2l, (5)
whence it can be seen that g(0)(l) is asymptotic to 2l/landg(1)(2l) is asymptotic to 2(l−1)/l.
In the large llimit, most of the cycles have the maximal length.
5.2 Global attractors
A global attractor is made out of the composition of the limit cycles of all the modules. Its
period is thus the least common multiple of the periods of the cycles th at compose it. The
number of attractors is larger than or equal to the product of th e number of cycles in the
diﬀerent modules. In fact the number of attractors that can be f ormed with a set of limit
cycles, each one taken from a diﬀerent module, is equal to the maxim um common divisor of
the periods of the cycles.
17
Even in the absence of an analytic description of the statistical pro perties of the modules,
the study of the modular structure allows us to better interpret t he numerical results about
the distributions of the number andof the length of the attractor sin critical networks [8] and
sheds light on the large size behavior of these quantities. In the follo wing we will concentrate
our discussion on critical networks.
First, we note that the two extremal situations of very high and ve ry low connectivity,
which are reminiscent respectively of the chaotic and of the frozen phase, are expected to be
very diﬀerent also from the point of view of the properties of the at tractors.
In high connectivity critical networks the attractors are reminisc ent of the chaotic phase
(we have to remember, nevertheless, that for critical networks Kefftends to 1 in the inﬁnite
size limit, so that high connectivity means that there is a large but ﬁnit e number of elements
with two connections. Such networks are characterized, as it is dis cussed above, by few
modules of large size). We observed in fact that the average length of the cycles increases
exponentially with the number of relevant elements for large R, as it happens in the chaotic
phase. Thus in such networks the average length of the cycles sho uld increase as a stretched
exponential of system size. This result is consistent with the fact t hat the distribution of
the length of the cycles seems to have an eﬀective scale increasing a s a stretched exponential
[8]. Similarly, we expect that the number of attractors in such netwo rks is not very large (in
the chaotic phase the number of attractors increases linearly with the number of relevant
elements), but we don’t have data to compare to this prediction.
In low connectivity critical networks there are several modules wit h very few elements.
Most of the modules are just loops with eﬀective connectivity exact ly equal to 1, so that
the length of the local periods is proportional to the size of the loop and the number of cy-
cles increases almost exponentially with it. Thus, in this situation we ex pect to ﬁnd a very
large number of attractors, exponentially increasing with the numb er of relevant elements.
This means that in such networks the number of cycles should increa se approximately as a
stretched exponential of system size. The distribution of the num ber of attractors is consis-
tent with this prediction, since it has an eﬀective scale increasing as a stretched exponential
of system size. On the other hand, we expect to ﬁnd in such networ ks short cycles: the typ-
ical length should be the minimal common multiple of the size of the modu les, and it should
increase as the square root of the number of elements, as far as t he number of modules is
not very large. But, as Nincreases, this scaling should be lost and substituted by a faster
increase.
It can thus be understood why both the distributions of the length of the cycles and the
distribution of their number become broader and broader when sys tem size increases: in the
ensemble of critical networks quite diﬀerent situations coexist. It seems also that networks
characterized by a small number of short attractors (meaning by this that the number and
the length increase not faster than a power law of N) can be found only if the number of
relevant elements is very small, thus with vanishing probability as Nincreases. However,
this qualitative picture still requires more accurate further invest igations to be conﬁrmed or
rejected.
18
6 Attraction basins
While the number and the length of the attractors depend only on th e number and the size
of the modules, this is not true for the size of the attraction basins .
In fact, when we extract at random an initial conﬁguration, the ele ments that are going
to become stable are not yet stable and the modules are not yet for med (the case K= 1
is an exception, since in this case the modules are present from the b eginning), since the
elements of diﬀerent modules can still communicate. Thus the attra ction basins of two
critical networks with the same modular structure but with diﬀeren t bare connectivity don’t
need to be identical. In fact, we expect that the attraction basins for critical systems are
larger the larger is K, since then ρc= 1/Kis smaller and a large number of the input
conﬁgurations produce the same state. In the following, we will be m ainly dealing with
critical systems, unless otherwise stated.
The simulations of critical systems with K= 2 and K= 4 conﬁrm that, for a given
system size, the attraction basins are on the average larger for K= 4 than for K= 2 [8],
but show also that the main characteristics of the distribution of th e weight of the attraction
basins are the same in both cases. The weight of the attraction bas inα,Wα, is deﬁned as the
fraction of conﬁgurations that evolve towards attractor α. This quantity has to be averaged
over all the attractors and over several realizations of the dyna mical rules. Following [9] we
use the notation
∝angbracketleftY2∝angbracketright=/summationdisplay
α/angbracketleftBig
W2
α/angbracketrightBig
. (6)
(the angular brackets represent the average over the disorder ).
For both the Kvalues that we examined, ∝angbracketleftY2∝angbracketrightvanishes as system size increases, and
in both cases our data are compatible with a power law decay with the s ame exponent for
the two parameters considered, suggesting that this behavior is u niversal along the critical
line. Moments of higher order of the weight of the attraction basins also seem to vanish as
a power law of system size, but with an exponent which is not proport ional to the order of
the moment, so that a typical weight of the attraction basins can n ot be deﬁned and the
distribution of the weights has multi-fractal properties [10].
The fact that the average weight of the attractor basins vanish in the inﬁnite size limit
can be qualitatively explained considering the modular structure of c ritical networks. We
measured ∝angbracketleftY2∝angbracketrightselecting only networks with a number mof modules and we observed that
this conditional average is a decreasing function of m, as ﬁgure 9 shows.
This behavior has a clear explanation in networks with K= 1, where the modules are
independent form the beginning. In this case, two conﬁgurations b elong to the same attrac-
tion basin if and only if all their components on diﬀerent modules belong to the attraction
basins of the same local cycles. Since all such components are extr acted independently, the
probability of such an event is the product of the probabilities relativ e to individual modules
and vanishes as the number of modules increases. This reasoning ca n not be applied to
networks with connectivity larger than one, as we said previously, b ut the result that the
average value of Y2decreases with the number of modules remains valid also in this case.
On the other hand, the average weight of the attraction basins ha s not a monotonic
behavior as a function of the number of relevant elements in the net work,R. This fact
19
0 1 2 3 4 5
m0.00.20.40.60.81.0<Y2>N = 120
N = 240
N = 480
N = 720
N = 1280
N = 1600
Figure 9: Conditional average of Y2=/summationtext
αW2
ain networks with mmodules. K= 4,ρ= 1/4.
20
can be explained as a consequence of the fact that the number of m odules does not grow
monotonically with the number of relevant elements in the network. I n the low-connectivity
regime the number of modules increases with R, thus the weight of the attraction basins
decreases. The contrary happens in the high-connectivity regime .
These characteristics do not change in the chaotic phase. Also for chaotic systems the
average weight of the attractionbasins decreases with the numbe r of modules in thenetwork,
but in this case the probability to ﬁnd more than one module goes to ze ro in the inﬁnite
size limit, and the eﬀects of the modular organization disappear. In p articular, the average
basin weight remains ﬁnite and its limit value appears to be very close to the Random Map
value∝angbracketleftY2∝angbracketright= 2/3, as predicted by the annealed approximation [6].
Weobserved insimulations reportedin[6]thatinchaoticsystems not farfromthecritical
line (K= 3,ρ= 1/2) the average basin weight, ∝angbracketleftY2∝angbracketright, is not a monotonic function of system
size: at ﬁrst it decreases with N, then attains a minimum value of about 0 .59 atN= 40
and starts to increase, apparently toward the Random Map value o f 2/3. One could think
that this not monotonic behavior is related to the modular structur e, supposing that its
eﬀects are not monotonic in system size. This does not appear to be the case, as the same
not monotonic behavior as a function of system size can be observe d restricting the sample
to networks with a single module (they are the big majority even for s mall sizes, in the
chaotic phase). Nevertheless, it is possible that the extension of t he concept of modules
that we proposed in section 2 in order to ﬁll the gap between the obs erved distribution of
modules and the eﬀects of factorization of cycle lengths can give a b etter comprehension of
this behavior.
7 Discussion
The dynamical transition taking place in Kauﬀman networks can be ch aracterized as a
percolation transition in the set of the relevant elements (the analo gy with percolation was
already proposed by Derrida and Stauﬀer with respect to Random b oolean networks on a
lattice [5]).
In the frozen phase, the relevant elements are ﬁnite in number also in the inﬁnite size
limit and they are divided into asymptotically independent modules. In t he chaotic phase
all the relevant elements belong to the same cluster, and their numb er is proportional to
system size. At the border between these two phases, the critica l line is characterized by a
number of relevant elements increasing as√
Nand a number of modules that grows with
system size (apparently with a logarithmic behavior).
Critical networks have a wide range of modular structures, rangin g from networks remi-
niscent of the frozen phase (with few relevant elements and low eﬀe ctive connectivity and a
number of modules that increases with the number of relevant eleme nts) to networks remi-
niscent of the chaotic phase (with many relevant elements, larger e ﬀective connectivity and
a number of modules that decreases with the number of relevant ele ments).
The modular organization can explain qualitatively – and, maybe, also q uantitatively
– the main properties of the attractors of critical networks. The se attractors are the com-
position of the undecomposable cycles of the elements of the single m odules, so that their
21
length is the minimal common multiple of the lengths of these cycles and their number is
the product of the numbers of these cycles. One expects then th at networks closer to the
frozen phase, whose modules have eﬀective connectivity very clos e to 1, are characterized
by a large number of attractors (exponentially increasing with R, the number of relevant
elements) whose length increases as Ror faster. In networks close to the chaotic phase, on
the other hand, one expects to ﬁnd less attractors (for the sam e value of R), but longer ones.
This is in agreement with the observed distributions of the number an d of the length of the
attractors, that become broader and broader as system size inc reases.
It seems to us that these results imply that the typical values of th e number and of the
length of the attractors increase asymptotically faster than any power law. In simulations of
small systems, Kauﬀman [1] observed that this quantities behave a s√
N. Simulating larger
critical systems [8], we observed that the distributions of these qu antities are compatible
with two eﬀective scales, one increasing as√
Nand another one, for rare but not vanishingly
rare networks, increasing as a stretched exponential of N. This observation is consistent
with the conclusions that can be drawn from the study of the modula r organization.
The study of the modular structure can also explain why the averag e weight of the
attraction basins of critical networks vanishes in the inﬁnite size limit .
Thusitwouldbeinterestingtoinvestigateanalyticallythedistribution ofsizeandnumber
of the modules. We think that the approach that we used to estimat e the number of relevant
elements, consisting in adding a new element to the network and comp uting the modiﬁcation
of the modular structure, could be a good tool for a more quantita tive understanding of the
modular organization of critical networks, if the approximation tha t we used can be in some
way controlled.
The modular organization of Kauﬀman networks is a consequence of the ﬁnite connectiv-
ity of this model. It is because of the ﬁnite connectivity that some ele ments become stable,
and act as a barrier in the transmission of information among diﬀeren t modules. Thus the
structures described in this work are peculiar to this kind of cellular a utomata, and they are
not common to other models, for other aspects very similar to this o ne, such as asymmetric
neural networks. It would be interesting to understand if and how the existence of a modular
organization is related to the biological situation that Kauﬀman netw orks are intended to
model,i.e.genetic regulatory systems.
Wethinkthatthespontaneousemergenceofamodularorganizatio nincriticalnetworksis
one of the most interesting features of such systems, and could h ave played an important role
in the emergence of cellular organization from an hypothetical netw ork of chemical reactions
where the primordial regulatory rules were of a probabilistic type. O ne of the advantages
of modularity is the possibility to build many independent objects, whic h could have been
shaped more easily by natural selection. This interpretation is highly speculative but very
appealing, and raises for the biological modelization the challenging qu estion about the
mechanisms which could drive to criticality such an hypothetical ense mble of self regulated
chemical reactions.
We argue from this study that for large system size the typical sca le of the number and of
the length of the attractors increase much faster than√
N, as it was observed by Kauﬀman
in early works [1]. The√
Nlaw was considered by Kauﬀman an important argument in
favor of the fact that randomly assembled networks of regulator y systems can behave in a
22
way very reminiscent of the behavior of true biological organisms. T his law, and thus the
biological analogy, still holds approximately for a small enough numbe r of elements. When
thenumber of genes becomes large, on theother hand, thenumbe r of cycles (in thebiological
metaphor, the number of cellular types) and especially their length ( which in the biological
metaphor represents cycle cell time) become too large to allow a biolo gical interpretation. In
this case it seems unlikely that critical random boolean networks beh ave as control networks
in the cells, and that the scaling laws observed for real organisms ar e just a reﬂex of the
typical properties of random regulatory networks. Random boole an networks with a number
of elements of the same order as the number of genes in higher euka riots have with ﬁnite
probability too many and too long attractors, and some kind of selec tion must come into
play to maintain the approximate power law scaling observed for small systems. But it may
be that genetically interesting networks are not vanishingly rare in t he ensemble of critical
Kauﬀmannetworks in the inﬁnite size limit. In the biological picture pro posed by Kauﬀman,
thiswouldmeanthatsomepropertiesofrealcellscanstillbeinterpr etedastypical properties
of an ensemble of randomly assembled regulatory networks, even if this ensemble has not to
be identiﬁed with the whole ensemble of critical Kauﬀman networks.
Acknowledgments
U.B. would like to thank Henrik Flyvbjerg and Peter Grassberger for interesting discussions
and for reading the manuscripts.
References
[1] S.A. Kauﬀman (1969), Metabolic Stability and Epigenesis in Random C onstructed
Genetic Nets, J. Theor. Biol. 22, 437-467.
[2] S.A. Kauﬀman (1990), Origins of Order: Self-Organization and Selection in Evolu tion,
Oxford University Press
[3] U. Bastolla and G. Parisi (1996), Relevant Elements, Magnetizat ion and Dynamical
Properties in Kauﬀman Networks: a Numerical Study, Physica D .
[4] H. Flyvbjerg, N.J. Kjaer (1988), Exact Solution of Kauﬀman Mod el with Connectivity
One,J.Phys. A:Math.Gen. 21(7), 1695-1718
[5] B. Derrida, D. Stauﬀer (1986): Phase Transitions in Two-dimens ional Kauﬀman Cel-
lular Automata, Europhys. Lett. 2(10), 739-745
[6] U. Bastolla and G. Parisi (1996), Closing Probabilities in the Kauﬀma n model: an
Annealed Computation, Physica D 98, 1
[7] H. Flyvbjerg (1988), An Order Parameter for Networks of Aut omata,J.Phys.
A:Math.Gen. 21L955-L960
[8] U. Bastolla and G. Parisi (1996), The Critical Line of Kauﬀman Net works,Journal of
Theoretical Biology , in press.
23
[9] B. Derrida and H. Flyvbjerg (1986), Multivalley Structure in Kauﬀ man’s Model: Anal-
ogy with Spin Glasses, J.Phys.A: Math.Gen. 19, L1003-L1008
[10] G. Paladin and A. Vulpiani (1987), Anomalous Scaling Laws in Multifr actal Objects,
Phys. Rep. 156, 147-225.
24
