arXiv:cond-mat/9709227v1  [cond-mat.dis-nn]  20 Sep 1997The topological structure of 2D disordered cellular system s
H. M. Ohlenbusch, T. Aste, B. Dubertret and N. Rivier
Equipe de Physique Statistique, LDFC Universit´ e Louis Pas teur,
3, rue de l’Univresit´ e, 67084 Strasbourg France.
helgo,benoit@maxent.u-strasbg.fr, tomaso,nick@ldfc.u -strasbg.fr
Abstract
We analyze the structure of two dimensional disordered cell ular systems generated by exten-
sive computer simulations. These cellular structures are s tudied as topological trees rooted on
a central cell or as closed shells arranged concentrically a round a germ cell. We single out the
most signiﬁcant parameters that characterize statistical ly the organization of these patterns.
Universality and speciﬁcity in disordered cellular struct ures are discussed.
PACS numbers: 82.70Rr, 02.50.-r, 05.07.Ln
1 Introduction
Cellularstructures, space-ﬁllingdisorderedpatterns, arewidesp readin nature [1, 2, 3]. In an ordered
structure, one must constrain the elementary bricks (or group o f them) to satisfy the local rotational
symmetry compatible with translational invariance. By contrast, a disordered structure is free
of any local symmetry constraint, and only subjected to the inesc apable, topological condition
of partitioning space. In two dimensions, these structures (frot hs) are partitions of the plane by
irregular polygons. Disorder, or absence of symmetry, imposes min imal incidence numbers (3 edges
incident on a vertex, 2 faces incident on a edge). The Four-Corner boundary between the States
of Arizona, Utah, Colorado and New Mexico is a decision made in Washing ton; it has nothing
to do with population dynamics or with agricultural eﬃciency. It is neit her topologically, nor
structurally stable: a small deformation splits it into two topologically stable three-State vertices,
found everywhere else on Earth.
The setofallthe possibleconﬁgurationsofafrothcanbe explored byelementary, localtopological
transformations [4] which, in two dimensions, are: T1, exchange of neighbours (for example, a ﬂip
betweenthestablealternativesofUT-NMorofAZ-COasneighbour s,abouttheunstablefour-corner
boundary); T2, disappearance (or apparition) of a triangular cell into a single vert ex. Two alterna-
tive, equivalent transformations are the cell-division (called mitosis in biology) and cell-coalescence.
It can be easily seen (ﬁg.1) that local, speciﬁc combinations of division and coalescence generate
the two elementary transformation T1 and T2, and vice versa. The se elementary, local topological
transformations are observed in all natural foams, soap froths , metallurgical grain aggregates, but
also in biological tissues (epidermis) [5] or in the cellular networks prod uced by B´ enard-Marangoni
convection, whether in the laboratory or on the surface of the su n (solar granulation) [2, 3].
In inﬁnite two dimensional (2D) Euclidean froths (or froths with per iodic boundary conditions),
the average number of neighbours per cell is ﬁxed by the Euler relat ion to be equal to 6 [2]. Given a
cell with nedges, the quantity q= 6−nis called its topological charge. The sum of the charges of
the cells overthe whole inﬁnite Euclidean froth must be equalto zero . The topologicalchargecannot
be generated or destroyed. It is just shuﬄed in between cells by th e topological transformations.
In this paper, extensive computer simulation are performed to obt ain disordered systems with
more than 105cells generated from an hexagonal lattice and applying at random eit her only T1, or
T1 and T2, or cell-division and coalescence transformations. In the se simulated froths, we forbid
1
Figure 1: A froth is a cellular network generated or transformed by successive applications of two
local elementary transformations: T1 (neighbours exchange), a nd T2 (triangular) cell disappearance
(a). These two transformations can also be regarded as combinations (c)of cell division and cell
coalescence (b).
conﬁgurations with cells which are neighbours of themselves and cells with two edges. The typical
resulting structures are shown in ﬁg.2.
The structural organizationofthese computer-generatedfro ths arestudied in terms ofthe relative
distances between cells. Two diﬀerent topological distances can be introduced: the bond distance [6,
7] andthe shell distance [8,9, 10,11](section2). Thesetwodistancesarediﬀerent: the b onddistance
is deﬁned on the graph of the froth; the shell distance is best deﬁn ed on its dual triangulation. They
are associated with the number of edges (or vertices) of the shor test paths between two cells. The
relationbetween the two distancesis verycomplex and stronglydep endent onthe froth organization,
because they involve minimal paths.
The characterization of a disordered structure is a diﬃcult task. T he absence of translational
order or repetitive local conﬁguration makes in principle necessary to know the position, size and
shapeofeverycellin ordertocompletely characterizethe struct ure. But, disordermakesmostofthis
detailed local information unimportant. The physical properties of the froth must be describable
in terms of macroscopic statistical information. A simple and powerf ul way to study disordered
cellular systems, is to analyze the structure as organized around a given arbitrary central cell. The
information about the structure can be obtained in terms of the pr operties of the set of cells at
the a given distance (bound or shell) from the central cell. We show t hat the classiﬁcation by
bond distances reduces the froth to a set of trees rooted on the vertices of an arbitrary central
cell (see ﬁg.3). On the other hand, in terms of shell distance, the f roth can be seen has a set of
2
Figure 2: Typical topological froths generated by: (a)Cell division and coalescence; (b)T1 trans-
formations only; (c)T1 and T2 transformations.
closed layers of cells arranged concentrically around the central c ell (see ﬁg.4). This classiﬁcation
in terms of distances naturally introduces a structure and a hierar chy in the froth. Moreover, a
physical meaning is directly associated to the sets of equally-distan t cells: any perturbation, signal
or information propagates from a given cell to the whole froth thro ugh these structures and cells at
the same distance are those reached -on average- at the same tim e and with equal intensity by the
signal. They are the successive wave fronts of the signal in the fro th.
2 Topological structure of a froth
Topological distances
Consider two cells in a froth. These cells are connected by many path s along the edges of the
direct graph or of its dual triangulation. Two diﬀerent topological d istances can be associated with
minimal paths:
The bond distance , is the minimum number ofedgesnecessaryto connect two cells in the direct
graph of the froth.1. (The concepts of bond distance and of bond neighbours was ﬁrst introduced
by one of the authors [6], who called them T1 distance and T1 neighbou rs, respectively [7].)
The shell distance (or simply, topological distance [11]), is the minimum number of edges
connecting the centers of two cells in the dual triangulation.2
All the cells in the froth can be classiﬁed in terms of distances (bond & shell) with respect to a given
“central” cell.
We denote by Ftthe number of cells which are at a bond distance tand byKjthe number of cells
which are at a shell distance jfrom a given central cell. These quantities are in generaldependen t on
the number of edges nof the central cell. For any froth on the Euclidean plane, FtandKjincrease
with the respective distances. But the rates of growth are chara cteristics of a speciﬁc cellular system
and are good, sensitive quantities to characterize its disorder (se e section 4 and [12, 13]).
1This path is a set adjacent edges ( ‘bonds’) connecting the two cells.
2The set of equidistant cells makes a closed layer around the c entral cell, and successive layers form concentric
rings. The edges separating two successive layers form a clo sed loop: the ‘shell’[11].
3
Figure 3: (a)The forest of n bond trees. (b)In a tree, any vertex at distance tis connected with
one bond to a vertex at distance t−1. Two of the three cells incident on a vertex at distance tare
also incident on a vertex at distance t−1. The mean vertex connectivity ( zt) tends asymptotically
to 2, which is typical of a tree structure spanning vertices distribu ted uniformly (see also ﬁg.12). In
(c)vertices with connectivity z= 1 andz= 3 are labelled with white and black circles respectivelly.
The n rooted bond trees
Associated with the bond distance, there is a spanning forest of n t rees rooted on the central cell
and reaching every vertex of the froth in the least number of step s . These trees are the minimal
bond paths which join the vertices of the froth with the central ce ll. Consider a vertex of the froth
at a large bond distance t. It has 3 neighbouring vertices, with at least one at a distance t−1. Select
one of them and connect it with a bond. The other neighbouring vertex at t−1 (if there is one) is
left unconnected. Continue down in distances until a vertex of the central cell is reached. This is
therootof the tree, which, at this stage, is simply a branch (chain) of tbonds. Then, begin again
with another vertex at distance t, down in distances. This second t-branch either meets the ﬁrst at
some point, or it reaches another root (vertex of the central ce ll). Proceed successively with every
vertex at distance t, down in distances until the branch connects another branch or is rooted into
the central cell. Consider then the vertices at distance t−1 which have not yet been reached by the
branches already constructed, and repeat the operations abov e. By repeating the process to all the
vertices yet unspanned at distances t,t−1,t−2,....,2, 1, 0, we generate a forest of ntrees, where n
is the number of vertices (and of edges) of the central cell. These trees are rooted on the central cell
and span all the vertices of the froth. Fig.3 (a) shows a forest of t rees up to distance 3. Each vertex
in the tree has connectivity 2 ≤z≤3, except the root and branch ends which have connectivity
1 (zero if the tree consists of its root vertex only, as happens, fo r example, if the central cell has a
3-cell as topological neighbour). Call ztthe average vertex connectivity at distance t(1≤zt≤3
4
Figure 4: The shell structure. Any froth can be analyzed as struc tured in a system of closed
concentriclayersofcellsat the sameshell distance with respect to the centralcell. The cells (hatched
in the ﬁgure) in layer ( j) with neighbours in layers ( j−1) and (j) only, are local topological defects
included between the layers.
fort >0 and 0≤z0≤1). It follows immediatelly that Vt+1= (zt−1)VtandV1=z0V0=z0n. The
number of vertices at distance t >1 is therefore related to the number of edges of the central cell
(n)
Vt=/bracketleftBig
z0t−1/productdisplay
i=1(zi−1)/bracketrightBig
n . (1)
The bond distance associated to a cell is the bond distance of its ver tex nearest to the central
cell. Consider a vertex at distance t. It has 3 incident cells. Two must also be incident on a vertex
at distance t−1 (they are separated by the bond linking vertex tto vertex t−1, see ﬁg.3(b) ).
Therefore, to each vertex at a given distance, there correspon ds no more than one cell at the same
distance, i.e. Ft=νtVtwithνt≤1. In 2D Euclidean froths, a cell has 6 vertices on average, and 3
cells are incident on any vertex. Therefore we expect ν≃0.5 on average.
A special case is the hexagonal lattice where there are 6 vertices a nd 6 cells at distance t= 1, 12
vertices and 6 cells at t= 2, 12 vertices and 12 cells at t= 3, and, in general Vt=Ft= 3(t+ 1)
fortodd and Vt= 3(t+ 2) and Ft= 6 forteven. We have therefore νt= 0.5 on average, with
νt= 1 when tis odd and νt= 0 when tis even. This diﬀerence between even and odd distances is
characteristic of the hexagonal lattice. When the froth is disorde red, this diﬀerence between even
and odd distances disappears and, asymptotically, the quantities VtandFtgrow linearly with the
distance twithνt≃0.5. The growth law depends on the speciﬁc system and it is studied in se ction
3 and 4.
The shell structure
The structure associated with the shell distance for a typical fro th is shown in ﬁg.4. The shell
distance foliates the froth into successive layers of cells surround ing the central cell. Most cells at a
5
Figure 5: The shortest bond path crosses at least tmin= 2j−3 vertices to connect the central cell
with a cell in the layer j.
(shell) distance jfrom the central cell have neighbours at distances j−1,jandj+1. They belong
to layer ( j). In addition, some cells at distance j(hatched in Fig.4) have neighbours at distances
j−1 andjonly. These cells are local defectinclusions, intercalated between layers ( j−1) and (j).
In this paper we characterize the shell structure by the number o f cells at distance j,Kj(n),
averaged over all n-sided central cells. In the perfect honeycomb (hexagonal frot h),Kj= 6j, there
are no defects, and the successive layers have an hexagonal sha pe. In a random froth, the layers are
roughly circular, but wiggly. At large distances, Kj(n) is larger than for the honeycomb, but still
increases linearly with the distance. The rate of increase is related t o the degree of disorder and to
the number of topological defects in the system [12].
The combined structure
The quantities FtandKjare both radial properties with the angular dependence averaged out.
In order to extract information on the angular ﬂuctuations, it is int eresting to study the interplay
between bond and shell structures. A bond tree develops radially o utward from the central cell
along edges which are perpendicular to the shells and it broadens side ways along edges parallel to
the shells. The distribution in the bond tree of edges parallel to the s hells gives therefore a measure
of its spread. Call N(j,t) the number of couples of cells that are simultaneously at a shell dist ancej
and at a bond distance tfrom each other. (Clearly,/summationtext
tN(j,t) =KjNand/summationtext
jN(j,t) =FtN, with
Nthe total number of cells in the system.)
To calculate N(j,t), let one of the cells be the central cell. The other cell is at shell dist ancej.
What is the bond distance tbetween the two cells? It is readily seen (Fig.5) that at least 2 bonds
are necessary to go from one layer to the next. Thus, tmin= 2j−3 =tRforj≥2. Therefore, tRis
the radial component of the bond distance. (In an hexagonal fro th,t=tR, forj≥2.)
In disordered froths, the bond distance tis, in general, much larger than tR. Suppose, for
instance, that a path takes in average ∝angbracketleftv∝angbracketrightextra bonds from one layer to the next. These extra bonds
correspond to segments of the bond tree parallel to the shell and also to extra vertices associated
to the topological defects between the shells. From the central c ell to a cell at distance j, there
are∝angbracketleftv∝angbracketright(j−1) additional bonds and the total bond distance is therefore t=tR+∝angbracketleftv∝angbracketright(j−1) =
(2 +∝angbracketleftv∝angbracketright)j−3− ∝angbracketleftv∝angbracketright. The number vof extra bonds between layers is a random variable with
probability distribution w(v) and mean ∝angbracketleftv∝angbracketright. When w(v) is Poissonian, the conditional probability
P(t|j) of ﬁnding a cell at a bond distance t, given that it lies at a shell distance j, is a shifted
6
n0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20p(n)
0.000.050.100.150.200.250.300.350.40
Figure 6: Distribution of the number of edges per cell in the froth ge nerated by applying cell-division
and coalescence transformations (C-D simulation).
Poissonian with average ¯t=∝angbracketleftv∝angbracketright(j−1)+2j−3 and variance σ2=∝angbracketleftv∝angbracketright(j−1) (see appendix A). The
number of couples of cells which are simultaneously at a shell distance jand at a bond distance tis
therefore
N(j,t) =NKjP(t|j) =NKje−/angbracketleftv/angbracketright(j−1)[∝angbracketleftv∝angbracketright(j−1)]t−2j+3
(t−2j+3)!. (2)
The arrangementof the cells in any layercan therefore be describe d in terms of a single parameter
∝angbracketleftv∝angbracketrightonly.
3 Simulation of disordered cellular systems
Coalescence and Division (C-D simulation)
The disordered cellular system is generated staring form an hexago nal lattice of N0= 144400 cells,
with periodic boundary conditions, and performing 5 N0of T1 transformations on edges chosen at
random. Then, a cell chosen at random, is divided in two parts (mitos is) if it has more than 6 sides
or fused by coalescence with one of its neighbours if has less than 6 s ides. If it has six sides, it is
divided with probability pd= 1/4 or left unchanged with probability 1 −pd= 3/4. The coalescence
is performed between the cell and one of its neighbours chosen at r andom. We chose a symmetric
mode of division: the two “daughters” of an n-sided “mother” cell have both 2 + n/2 edges for n
even, and 2 + ( n+ 1)/2 and 2 + ( n−1)/2 edges if nis odd (which one has which is assigned at
random).
After iterating the coalescence-division operations for 10 N0times, the resulting structure (shown
in ﬁg.2(a)) reaches a stationary number of N= 114475 cells. The normalized distribution of the
7
number of transformations x  N  0 2 4 6 8 10024681012
towards order
towards disorderµµ
Figure 7: Second moment of the edges distribution ( µ2) v.s. the number of elementary topological
transformations, in the system generated by cell-division and coale scence transformations (C-D
simulation). The system converges toward a steady state which is in dependent of the starting
conﬁguration. Ifthesimulationstartsfromaverydisorderedsta te, thesystemselforganizesreducing
the disorder by random local transformations.
number of edges per cell ( p(n)) is shown in ﬁg.6. It has a maximum at n= 6 and decreases
exponentially for n≥6) asp(n) =p6exp[−α(n−6)] with p6= 0.37 andα= 0.9. The second
moment of the distribution is µ2= 1.77, and the Aboav-Weaire parameter [2, 14, 15] is a= 0.64.
This distribution is stationary under further division-coalescence t ransformations. It is also in-
dependent of the initial conﬁguration. We have obtained statistica lly identical froths starting from
the hexagonal lattice ( µ2= 0) or from a very disordered froth with µ2>10. In the ﬁrst case, the
system evolves from order to disorder during the simulation. By con trast, in the second case, the
disorder of the system decreases throughout the simulation (see ﬁg.7). This is an example of self
organization induced by local random transformations only. The dis tribution p(n) reaches a steady
state, regardless of the parameter pdwhich controls the fate of 6-sided cells. However, the number
of cells is very sensitive to pd. Forpd= 1/4, once the steady state is reached, the number of cells
in the froth remains also stable. But, when pd= 0, the number of cells in the system decreases,
whereas, when pd= 1/2, it increases.
Random T1 (T1 simulation)
An hexagonal lattice of N= 100172 cells and periodic boundary conditions is disordered by ﬂippin g
(T1 transformation) 10 Nedges chosen at random. (Note that the T1 transformation cons erves
the total number of cells in the system.) If the chosen edge is bound ing a triangular cell, the T1
transformation is refused (lest it would generate a cell with two side s). The probability for a T1 to
be refused increases during the disordering process, it reaches t he value of 0.21 at the end of the
simulation.
A typical cellular system obtained with this simulation is shown in ﬁg.(2b) . Fig.8 shows the
probability distribution p(n) for this froth. The second moment is µ2= 11.9 and the Aboav-
8
n0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20p(n)
0
Figure 8: Distribution of the number of edges per cell in the froth ge nerated by T1 transformations
(T1 simulation).
Weaire parameter is a=−0.79. The average number of sides per cell is equal to 6 (as imposed by
the Euler theorem [2]) but the distribution is an exponential with a max imum at n= 3,p(n) =
p3exp[−α(n−3)] with p3= 0.27 andα= 0.30. In this simulation, most of the cells are triangles
because it is easier to generate a triangular cell than to make it gain a n edge by random T1.
Random T1 and T2 (T1-T2 simulation)
In this type of simulation, a ﬂip (T1 transformation) is performed on any edge chosen at random,
except if the edge is bounding a triangular cell. In this case, the trian gular cell is made to disappear
(T2 transformation). For this reason, the number of cells decrea ses during the simulation. We found
that, when 5 N0transformations are applied on an initially hexagonal lattice of N0cells, the number
of cells is reduced by half. But 10 N0transformations are more than enough to reduce the froth to
3 (hexagonal) cells only. This is the minimum possible number of cells for a froth tiling a torus.
Here each cell has 2 neighbours and 6 edges and they are arranged as shown in ﬁg.10. Note that, for
this conﬁguration, there are two families of closed paths of only 4 ed ges, not bounding a cell, that
wind around the torus. No further T1 or T2 transformations can b e applied on this ﬁnal, minimal
conﬁguration without generating a cell that is neighbour of itself.
This simulation started with an hexagonal lattice of N0= 250000 cells on which we applied 5 N0
of T1 or T2 transformations on edges chosen at random. The resu lting structure had a number of
cellsN= 115149. A typical froth generated by T1-T2 transformations is shown in ﬁg.2(c). The
probability distribution p(n) is plotted in ﬁg.9. It is quasi-stationary (until the system is close to
its ﬁnal conﬁguration of 6 hexagonal cell). It has a maximum in n= 4 and then decreases with
an exponential tail p(n) =p4exp[−α(n−4)] with p4= 0.84 andα= 0.53, forn >7. The second
moment is µ2= 6.33 and the Aboav-Weaire parameter is a= 0.05.
9
n0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20p(n)
0.000.050.100.150.20
Figure 9: Distribution of the number of edges per cell in the froth ge nerated by T1 and T2 trans-
formations (T1-T2 simulation).
4 Results and Discussion
Foreachsimulation,thecellularsystemsarecharacterizedbythen umberofcellsintheshellstructure
(Kj), in the bond trees ( Ft) and in the combined structure ( N(j,t)), at the respective distances j
andtof the central cell. The number of vertices in the bond trees Vtand their mean coordination
ztare also investigated.
Bond trees
The averagednumber of cells in the bond tree ( ∝angbracketleftFt∝angbracketright=/summationtext
np(n)Ft) as a function of the bond distance
tis shown in ﬁg.11. For the three sets of simulations, ∝angbracketleftFt∝angbracketrightincreases linearly with the distance as
t→ ∞, with a slope 3 .577 (D-C), 4.68 (T1) and 3.112 (T1-T2). As anticipated in Section 2, the
number of vertices at distance tin the bond tree is expected to be proportional to the number of
cells at that distance, Vt=Ft/νt. Indeed, we ﬁnd a coeﬃcient of proportionalitythat asymptotically
tends to νt→ν∞= 0.5.
Asymptotically, the mean vertex connectivity zttends to 2, which is typical of a tree structure
spanning vertices distributed uniformly on a ﬁnite area (see ﬁg.3(c) and ﬁg.12). There are nsuch
trees for an n-sided central cell. If the trees were not impeding each other one w ould expect Vt∝tn,
asymptotically in t. But trees do impede each other. This interaction between the ntrees implies
that, after a certain distance, the leading contribution to Vtis proportional to t, regardless of n. The
inﬂuence of the central cell is screened by the disorder [16], which d istributes the vertices uniformly
on the plane. This is manifest in Fig.13, which shows that Vtis linear in n, with a slope independent
oft.
10
Figure 10: Two topologically equivalent views of the ﬁnal conﬁguratio n for the T1-T2 simulation.
There are three cells of 6 sides tiling a torus. No further T1 or T2 tra nsformations can be applied
on this ﬁnal, minimal conﬁguration without generating a cell that is ne ighbour of itself.
11
t 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 10 0<Ft>
0100200300400T1
T1-T2C-D
Figure 11: Average number of cells ∝angbracketleftFt∝angbracketrightat distance tin the bond trees, for the three simulations
C-D, T1 and T1-T2. The average is over all central cells.
Figure 12: A bond tree spanning 1+ t(t+1)/2, uniformly distributed vertices (here on an hexagonal
tiling). There are tvertices at distance t, at the end of the branches, with coordination 1 (white
circles); thetverticesonthemaintrunkhavecoordination3(black circles); theroothascoordination
1. The remaining t(t−3)/2 vertices have coordination 2. Thus ∝angbracketleftz∝angbracketright= 2−O(1/t2).
12
n2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11Vt
020406080100
t = 1t = 20
t = 2t = 10.
.
.
.
.
.
t = 3t = 4
Figure 13: Number of vertices Vtin the bond trees as function of the number of edges of the centra l
celln, for several bond distances t. The data refer to the C-D simulation. Similar behaviours were
found for the other two types of simulations.
Shell structures
The number of cells Kjat shell distance j(whether within layer ( j) or inside defect inclusions)
increases linearly with jafter the ﬁrst few layers. The dependence of Kjon the number of edges n
of the central cell is also linear. Among all cells at distance j, the proportion belonging to defects
is 18% for the C-D simulation, 52% and 38% for the T1 and T1-T2 simulat ions, stationary after
a few layers. Fig.14 shows the averaged (over all central cells) num ber of cells ∝angbracketleftKj∝angbracketrightat a shell
distance j. Figure 14 shows clearly that the rate of growth Cof∝angbracketleftKj∝angbracketrightis very diﬀerent in the three
types of simulations. The number of cells at a given shell distance is lar ger in the more disordered
systems. Speciﬁcally, the rate is C= 19.35 for the C-D simulation ( µ2= 1.77),C= 56.6 for
the T1 simulation ( µ2= 11.9) andC= 25.7 for the T1-T2 simulation ( µ2= 6.33). These values
are much larger than C= 6 for the hexagonal tiling ( µ2= 0), or than C= 2πexpected if layers
were circular annuli. Indeed, in disordered froths the concentric la yers wiggle around the averaged
circular annulus. This behaviour has already been observed in soap a nd Voronoi froths [12]. It can
be interpreted as an additional, negative curvature caused by the disorder, and compensated by the
positive curvature of the defects intercalated between the layer s to produce a tiling which is globally
Euclidean. A relation for the slope Cin froths free of topological defects (SSI) ans with shortest
ranged correlations was obtained in [12]: C= 6+(3 −a)µ2, withathe Aboav-Weaire parameter.
This relation give C= 10.2,C= 51.3 andC= 24.7 for the C-D, T1 and T1-T2 simulations,
respectivelly. The moderate agreement indicates that defects ar e relevant.
The topological charge ( Qj) of a cluster bounded by layer ( j) (included) has been measured in
the three types of simulation. Figure (15) shows the averaged cha rge∝angbracketleftQj∝angbracketrightas a function of the shell
distance j(the average is over all the central cells). The topological charge ∝angbracketleftQj∝angbracketrightis negative and
decreases linearly with j(similar results were found for soap and Voronoi froths [12]). The m ean
topological charge per defect ( ∝angbracketleftqdef∝angbracketright) is independent of jat largej. We found ∝angbracketleftqdef∝angbracketright= 1.1 in the
C-D simulation, ∝angbracketleftqdef∝angbracketright= 2.1 and∝angbracketleftqdef∝angbracketright= 1.8 in the T1 and T1-T2 simulations, respectively.
The negative topological charge of the cluster ( Qj) is due to the wiggling of the boundary. The
linearity shows that the amplitude of the wiggling remains constant wit h increasing shell distance.
The boundary does not roughen as jincreases. The negative charge of the cluster is balanced by
13
j0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40<Kj>
0200400600800100012001400160018002000
+++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++T1
T1-T2
C-D
Figure 14: Average number of cells ∝angbracketleftKj∝angbracketrightat distance jin the shell layers, for the three simulations
C-D, T1 and T1-T2 and for the hexagonal lattice (+ symbol). The av erage is over all central cells.
the positive charges of the defects just outside its boundary.
Combined structure
The distribution N(j,t) of couples of cells at shell distance jand bond distance tis represented
in ﬁg.16 as a function of tfor diﬀerent values of j, for the T1 simulations. Beyond j= 10, the
distribution is symmetric, peaked at the mean value ¯t= 3.39j−4.2, with a variance σ2= 1.35j+3.2.
The other two types of simulation exhibit similar behaviours. The theo retical distribution (a shifted
Poissonian,eq.(2), derivedinAppendix A)isalsoplottedinﬁg.16(full lin e), with onlyoneparameter
∝angbracketleftv∝angbracketrightto be ﬁtted ( ∝angbracketleftv∝angbracketrightmeasures the mean increase in lateral spread of the tree, due to d isorder, it is
deﬁned in Section 2.) The agreementis excellent. We obtain ∝angbracketleftv∝angbracketright= 0.31 (C-D simulation), ∝angbracketleftv∝angbracketright= 1.39
(T1 simulation) and ∝angbracketleftv∝angbracketright= 0.84 (T1-T2 simulation). As expected, branches are longer in the mor e
disordered systems.
5 Conclusions
We have simulated and analyzed verydiﬀerent cellular patterns which have only the name of froth in
common: they are planar networks with minimal vertex connectivity . Several disordered froths with
more than 105cells were generated by computer simulations. The results present ed in this paper
refer to three types of simulations of cellular systems (C-D, T1 and T1-T2) generated with diﬀerent
techniques, which exhibit diﬀerent degrees of disorder. The T1 and T1-T2 simulations generate very
disordered systems where the number of edges of a cell ﬂuctuate s widely. (The sizes of the cells have
not been relaxed or adjusted in our topological simulations). The C- D simulation generates a more
14
j0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40<Qj>
-2200-2000-1800-1600-1400-1200-1000-800-600-400-2000
T1T1-T2C-D
Figure 15: Average topological charge ∝angbracketleftQj∝angbracketrightv.s.j, within a cluster bounded by a layer of cells at
shell distance j. The average is over all central cells. The topological charge of a n-sided cell is 6 −n
homogeneous cellular pattern, somewhat akin to soap froths or ot her natural cellular structures.
When C-D simulations are applied on an initially very disordered froth, t he system self-organises,
and a more homogeneous conﬁguration with steady statistical pro perties is reached. In all three
types of simulation, a stationary distribution of cells can be obtained . Moreover, the number of
cells in the froth also remains stationary in the C-D simulation for a spe cial value of the probability
pd= 1/4 of dividing 6-sided cells.
These disorderedcellularstructureswerecharacterizedin terms oftwodistancesfrom anarbitrary
central cell: the bondand theshelldistance. In terms of bond distances, the froth is structured in
a forest of nbond trees , rooted on the nvertices of the central cell. They have asymptotic vertex
coordination z∞= 2 and the number of vertices Vtat a given distance tincreases linearly both with
nand with t.
The number of cells Kjat a shell distance jfrom a given central cell, increases linearly with j.
This linearity seems to indicate that froths remain Euclidean structu res, and that the concentric
layers of cells at the same cell distance jfrom the central cell, if they wiggle, do not roughen. There
is no indication of fractal behaviour in our simulations (see [17] for an -artiﬁcial- example of fractal
froth). The rate of increase ( C) of the number Kjof cells with the shell distance jvaries strongly
with the type of simulation. It is larger for the more disordered syst ems,C= 6 for the hexagonal
tiling, and C≃19, 25 and 56 for the C-D, T1-T2, and T1 simulations, respectively. The slope of
Kjv.s.jis therefore a very good parameter to diﬀerentiate froths with va rious degrees of disorder.
Moreover, these diﬀerences should be observable in the physical p roperties of the froth like the
diﬀusion coeﬃcient [18].
The topological charge Qjof a cluster of cells at shell distances i≤jfrom a given central
cell is negative, with a linear dependence on j. This shows that layers of equidistant cells wiggle
15
t 0 20 40 60 80 10 0N(j,t)
0e+02e+64e+66e+68e+6 j = 25
 j = 20
 j = 15
 j = 10
 j = 5
 j=2
Figure 16: Number of couples of cells N(j,t) at a shell distance jand bond distance t, as function of
tfor several values of j. The symbols are data taken from the T1 simulation. The full lines are the
theoretical solution Eq.(2) with ∝angbracketleftv∝angbracketright= 1.39. Note the linear correlation between the most probable
value oftandj.
16
without roughening at larger distances, that this negative topolog ical charge or eﬀective curvature
is entirely due to the outermost layer, and that it is completely balanc ed by the positive charges of
the topological defects just outside the outermost layer of the c luster.
Inagivenfroth,thetwotopologicalstructures bond trees andshell structure areintimatelyrelated.
The combined structure was studied in terms of the number N(j,t) of cells which are simultaneously
at a shell distance jand at a bond distance tfrom a given central cell. We ﬁnd that the combined
structure is well described by only one parameter ∝angbracketleftv∝angbracketright, the mean number of extra bonds between
adjacent layers.
Acknowledgements: T. Aste acknowledges partial support from the European Union (T MR con-
tract ERBFMBICT950380).
A Distribution of bond distances of cells all at the same shel l
distance
Here, we estimate the quantity N(j,t). First consider the layer of cells at a shell distance jfrom
the central cell. Let P(t|j) be the conditional probability of ﬁnding, among all the cells at shell
distance jfrom the central cell, a cell at a bond distance t. This probability can be written in terms
ofN(j,t) asP(t|j) =N(j,t)/[/summationtext
tN(j,t)]. Letw(i) be the probability to require 2+ ibonds in the
path between a layer and the next. Therefore, any cell in layer jis connected, in the bond tree, to
a nearest cell the layer j−1 through a (shortest) path of 2+ ibonds, with probability w(i). Thus,
P(t|j) =t−2j+3/summationdisplay
i=0w(i)P(t−i−2|j−1) (for j >2). (3)
Let us now calculate P(t|1) andP(t|2). Cells sharing an edge with the central cell ( j= 1) are at
a bond distance zero. Thus, P(t|1) =δt,0). Cells of the second layer ( j= 2) are connected to the
nearest cell in the ﬁrst layer through a path of 1 + ibonds with the same probability w(i) (i= 0
labels those cells connected by one bond directly to the central cell) . Thus,
P(t|2) =t−1/summationdisplay
i=0w(i)P(t−i−1|1) =w(t−1). (4)
This ﬁxes the initial condition in Eq.(3).
The weights w(i) can be in principle any discrete probability distribution. The simplest c ase is
whenw(i) =δi,0. In this case, Eq.(3) has the solution P(t|j) =δt,2j−3. This solution has values
diﬀerentfromzeroonlyfor todd, itcorrespondstoastructurewith minimalbondlengththroug hout,
i.e. an hexagonal tiling, except for the arbitrary central cell.
A realistic probability function for the weights is the Poisson distribut ion of mean ∝angbracketleftv∝angbracketright:
w(i) =e−/angbracketleftv/angbracketright∝angbracketleftv∝angbracketrighti
i!. (5)
With this Ansatz, Eq.(3) has the solution
P(t|j) =e−/angbracketleftv/angbracketright(j−1)[∝angbracketleftv∝angbracketright(j−1)]t−2j+3
(t−2j+3)!. (6)
17
The number of couples of cells at shell distance jand bond distance tisN(j,t) =NKjP(j|t).
As function of t(withjas a parameter) N(j,t) is a shifted Poisson distribution with average
¯t=∝angbracketleftv∝angbracketright(j−1)+2j−3 and variance σ2=∝angbracketleftv∝angbracketright(j−1)).
References
[1] D’A.W. Thompson, On Growth and Form Cambridge Univ. Press. (1917, 1942), ch.7.
[2] D. Weaire and N. Rivier, Contemp. Physics 25(1984) 59.
[3] J. Stavans, Rep. Prog. Mod. Phys. 56(1993) 733.
[4] J. W. Alexander, Ann. Math. 31(1930) 292.
[5] B. Dubertret and N. Rivier, Biophys. Journal 73(1997) 38.
[6] B. Dubertret, Etudes th´ eoriques des syst` emes cellulaires d´ esordonn´ es. Application ` a la
mod´ elisation des tissus ´ epith´ eliaux , PhD Thesis, (Universit´ e Louis Pasteur Strasbourg, France
1998).
[7] B. Dubertret and K.Y. Szeto and W.Y. Tam, In preparation (1997 )
[8] N. Rivier, unpublished notes (1985); seminar, Imperial College (1 986).
[9] J. P. Troadec, unpublished notes (1985).
[10] M.A. Fortes and P.Pina, Philos. Mag. B 67, 263 (1993).
[11] T. Aste, D. Boose and N. Rivier, Phys. Rev. E 53, (1996) 6181.
[12] T. Aste, K. Y. Szeto and W. Y. Tam, Phys. Rev. E 54, (1996) 5482.
[13] T. Aste and N. Rivier, in Shape Modelling and Applications (IEEE Computer Society Press,
1997), p.2-9.
[14] D. A. Aboav, Metalloraphy 3, (1974) 383; 13, (1980) 43.
[15] D. Weaire, Metallography 7, (1974) 157.
[16] N. Rivier, B. Dubertret, T. Aste and H. M. Ohlenbusch, (1997) In preparation.
[17] R. Delannay and G. LeCa¨ er, J. Physique I 5(1995) 1417.
[18] T. Aste, Phys. Rev. E 55, (1997) 6233.
18
