arXiv:cond-mat/9809196v1  [cond-mat.stat-mech]  14 Sep 1998The kinesin walk: a dynamic model with elastically coupled h eads
Imre Der´ enyi∗and Tam´ as Vicsek†
Department of Atomic Physics, E¨ otv¨ os University, Budape st, Puskin u 5-7, 1088 Hungary
∗derenyi@hercules.elte.hu and†h845vic@ella.hu
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 93, 6775-6779 (1996)
ABSTRACT Recently individual two-headed
kinesin molecules have been studied in in vitro
motility assays revealing a number of their pe-
culiar transport properties. In this paper we pro-
pose a simple and robust model for the kinesin
stepping process with elastically coupled Brow-
nian heads showing all of these properties. The
analytic and numerical treatment of our modelre-
sults in a very good ﬁt to the experimental data
and practically has no free parameters. Chang-
ing the values of the parameters in the restricted
range allowed by the related experimental esti-
mates has almost no eﬀect on the shape of the
curves and results mainly in a variation of the
zero load velocity which can be directly ﬁtted to
the measured data. In addition, the model is con-
sistent with the measured pathway of the kinesin
ATPase.
Kinesin is a motor protein converting the energy of ATP
hydrolysis into mechanical work while moving large dis-
tances along microtubule ﬁlaments and transporting or-
ganelles and vesicles inside the cytoplasm of eukaryotic
cells [1]. The wall of a microtubule is made up of tubu-
lin heterodimers arranged in 13 longitudinal rows called
protoﬁlaments (Fig. 1). A tubulin heterodimer is 8 nm
long and consists of two globular proteins about 4 nm in
diameter: α- andβ-tubulin. The dimers bind head-to-
tail giving the polarity to the protoﬁlaments. The mi-
crotubule has a helical surface lattice which can have
two possible conﬁgurations: the adjacent protoﬁlaments
can be shifted in the longitudinal direction by about
either 5 nm (A-type lattice) or 1 nm (B-type lattice).
Electron micrograph measurements of microtubules dec-
oratedwithkinesinheadfragments[2–5]indicatethepre-
dominance of the B-type lattice and show that kinesin
heads can bind only to the β-tubulin (meanwhile weakly
interacting with the α-tubulin also). Native kinesin is a
dimeric molecule with two globular( ∼9×3×3nm) heads.
Each one has an ATP and a tubulin binding site.
Recent experimental studies in in vitromotility assays
have revealed the following properties of kinesin move-
ment:
•kinesin moves unidirectionally parallel to the
protoﬁlaments towards the “(+)” end of the mi-
crotubule [6,7];•under an increasing load the speed of the kinesin
decreases almost linearly [8,9] (see Fig. 3);
•under its stall force (about 5 pN) kinesin still con-
sumes ATP at an elevated rate [9];
•in the absence of ATP (in rigor state) kinesin binds
to the microtubule verystrongly: it supports forces
in excess of 10 pN [9];
•the observed step size in the low speed regime (at
low ATP or at high force) is about 8 nm [10];
•some backward slippage was clearly observed [9];
•thedisplacementvarianceatsaturatingATPandat
low load increases linearly with time, but at (only
somewhat more than) half of the rate of a single
Poisson stepping process with 8 nm step size, im-
plying that one step consists of two sequential sub-
processes with comparable limiting rates [11].
Partially motivated by these remarkable experimental
advances several interesting thermal ratchet type mod-
els have very recently been developed for the theoreti-
cal interpretation of the related transport phenomena.
These models [13–20] except that of Ajdari (Ref. [21])
consider cases in which the internal degree of freedom
of the molecular motors is not taken into account. The
purpose of the present work is to deﬁne and investigate
a dynamic model for the kinesin walk which has an in-
ternal degree of freedom and results in a full agreement
with the experimental data for the range of its param-
eters allowed by the known estimates for the lower and
upper bounds of these parameters.
There are two basic classes of possible models for the
stepping of kinesin [12]. The ﬁrst one is the “Long-
Stride” model in which the heads are moving along a
single protoﬁlament. The two heads are displaced from
each other by 8 nm. During the stepping process the
back head passes the bound front head advancing 16 nm.
Then the heads change their roles and a new step may
take place. However, within this framework during the
long stride the back head has a good chance to bind to
aβsite belonging to a neighboring track which is closer
than the next βsite in the same track. Another problem
is that the low displacement variance observed experi-
mentally cannot be naturally explained. This model was
studied in detail by Peskin and Oster [22], who by intro-
ducing several reaction rate constants found a reasonable
agreement with the experimental results.
1
α
β
α
β
α
β
α
βα
β
α
βα
β
α
β
α
β
α
βα
β
α
βα
β
α
β
α
β
α
βα
β
α
βα
β
α
β
α
β
α
βα
β
α
βα
β
α
β
α
β
α
βα
β
α
βα
β
α
β
α
β
α
βα
β
α
β
~1 nm~8 nm(+) End
(-) End
FIG. 1. The structure of the B-type helical surface lattice
of the microtubule. The kinesin heads can bind only to the
β-tubulin monomers.
The other possibility is the family of “Two-Step” mod-
els. These models naturally explain the low displace-
mentvariancebecauseofthetwosequentialsubprocesses.
During one cycle one of the two heads takes a 8 nm step
ﬁrst then the other head steps. Note that the motion
of just one head advances the centroid of the molecule
by only 4 nm the successive steps of the two heads in
rapid pair results in an eﬀective 8 nm step which can be
observed in the low speed regime. This kind of motion
gives large stability to the protoﬁlament tracking. The
diﬀerences in the “Two-Step” models arise from the rela-
tive positions of the heads. If both heads track the same
protoﬁlament they are not able to pass each other, so
we can always distinguish the front and the back head.
In this case the distance of the heads alternates between
8 and 16 nm, which seems a bit large for the kinesin
molecule with its 9 −10 nm long heads, but is still possi-
ble. (Alternating between 0 and 8 nm is already impossi-
ble because only one head can bind to each β-tubulin site
at a time). Another quite reasonable situation is when
thetwo heads track adjacent protoﬁlaments on a B-type
lattice. In this case the heads are sitting on adjacent β-
tubulins displaced from each other by only about 1 nm in
the longitudinal direction, thus either can take the ﬁrst
step (they can be identical).
DYNAMICS OF THE KINESIN WALK
We present here a one-dimensional kinesin walk model
which describes the whole family of “Two-Step” models.
Each of the two Brownian heads can move along its own
one-dimensionalperiodic potential with period L= 8 nm
in an overdamped environment. The two potentials canbe shifted relatively to each other by an arbitrary dis-
tance (or even can be the same). These potentials rep-
resent the interaction with the protoﬁlaments and the
periods are the tubulin heterodimers. Each period has a
deep potential valley corresponding to the binding site
of theβ-tubulin and the other parts of the potential
are ﬂat. Each valley has an asymmetric “V” shape (see
Fig. 2): the slope in the backward direction (towards the
“(−)” end of the microtubule) is steeper and 0 .5−1 nm
long, while the other slope (towards the “(+)” end) is
1.5−2 nm long, showing the polarity of the ﬁlaments.
These ranges are in the order of the Debye length.
FF (b)
Q Q
L = 8 nm L = 8 nm(a)
FIG. 2. Schematic picture of the potential and the sub-
sequent steps (from top to bottom) of the kinesin molecule
in the two limiting cases. In the case (a) the hinge is always
in the centroid of the molecule, and advances 4 −4 nm dur-
ing both subprocesses. The two heads share the load force
equally. In the case (b) the relative position of the hinge to
the back head is ﬁxed, thus the whole load force acts on this
head. During the ﬁrst subprocess the hinge does not move,
however, during the second it advances 8 nm. All the inter-
mediate cases are possible between (a) and (b).
In our model the heads are connected at a hinge, and
aspring acts between them (Fig. 2). At the beginning of
the mechanochemicalcycle both headsaresitting in their
valleyswaitingforanATPmolecule, andthespringisun-
strained. Any conﬁguration of the model is mathemati-
cally equivalent to a model in which the two potentials
areidentical, the heads aresitting in the same valley, and
therefore the rest length of the spring is zero. (Further
on we will consider only this version of the model.) After
one of the heads binds an ATP molecule, the hydrolysis
of this ATP causes a conformational change in this head,
2
more precisely, induces the head to take a 8 nm forward
step. In the language of the model it means that the
rest length of the spring changes from zero to 8 nm right
after the hydrolysis. Then, as the ﬁrst rate-limiting sub-
process, the strained spring is trying to stretch pushing
the head to the next valley. Reaching its new 8 nm rest
length another conformational change occurs in the head
as a consequence of the ADP release: the rest length
of the spring changes back to zero quickly, then, as the
second rate-limiting subprocess, the spring is trying to
contract pulling forward the other head. Completing
the contraction a next cycle can start waiting for a new
ATP molecule. Hirose et al.[5] provide evidence that the
kinesin·ADPcomplexhasindeedadiﬀerentconformation
near the junction of the heads. (Similarly, a myosin head
also gets over several conformational changes [23,24].)
An important cooperative feature of our model is that
only one ATP hydrolysis can occur during each cycle.
This picture is consistent with the scheme of Gilbert
et al.[25] for the pathway of the kinesin ATPase. The
ﬁrst rate-limiting subprocess was observed as the disso-
ciation of the head from the microtubule followed by a
fast rebinding. They did not report on the second one,
but it is clear that this subprocess already does not be-
long to the chemical part of the cycle, and induces a slow
dissociation and a fast rebinding of the other head.
We can take the load force into account in a natural
way. Since in the experiments of Svoboda et al.[9,10]
a large (∼0.5µm in diameter) and therefore slow (com-
pared to the kinesin heads) silica bead was linked to the
hinge of the kinesin molecule by a relatively weak elastic
tether, we can apply a constant (independent of time)
forceFto the hinge. We arrive at the same conclusion
by considering the experiments of Hunt et al.[8], where
a viscous load acted on the moving microtubule while
the long tail of the kinesin was ﬁxed. But how can we
transfer the force to the heads when writing down the
equations of their motion? There are two possible lim-
iting cases: if the hinge is always in the centroid of the
molecule (Fig. 2a) the two heads share the load force
equally,i.e.,F/2 force acts on both heads; if the head
which wants to step is always free from the load force
(as in Fig. 2b) the whole force Facts on the actual back
head. Due to the robustness of the model both (and
therefore all the intermediate) cases yield practically the
same force-velocity curves (Fig. 3).
The motion of the heads are described by the Langevin
equations
Γ˙x1=−∂xV(x1)−Fload
1+K·(x2−x1−l(t))+ξ1(t),
Γ˙x2=−∂xV(x2)−Fload
2+K·(x1−x2−l(t))+ξ2(t).
(1)
wherex1andx2denote the positions of the heads; Γ
is the frictional drag coeﬃcient; V(x) is the periodic
potential; l(t) is the rest length (which alternates be-
tween 0 and 8 nm due to the conformational changes)
andKis the stiﬀness of the spring; ξ1(t),ξ2(t) areGaussian white noises with the autocorrelation function/angbracketleftbig
ξj(t)ξi(t′)/angbracketrightbig
= 2kTΓδj,iδ(t−t′) fori,j= 1,2.
02004006008001000
0123456(a)
020406080
0123456Velocity  (nm/s)(b)
0100200300400500600
0123456
Load Force  (pN)(c)
FIG. 3. The force-velocity curves for an individual kinesin
molecule at saturating ( ≫90µM) ATP in (a) and (c); and at
low (∼10µM) ATP concentration in (b). The experimental
data (scattered symbols) are from Svoboda and Block [9] in
(a) and (b) obtained byusing optical tweezers; and from Hunt
et al.[8] in (c) applying viscous load. The open circles cor-
respond to the simultaneous eﬀect of multiple kinesin motor s
in the authors’ interpretation [8,9]. The circles and diamo nds
in (a) mean two diﬀerent set of the measured data. To get
the best ﬁt (solid lines) we chose 0.7 nm for the backward
length of the potential valleys and 1.75 nm for the forward
length; the depth of the valleys was Q= 20kT. In these plots
the load force was F/2 on each kinesin head. In plot (b) we
multiplied the average displacement by the ATP consumption
rateν(cATP) = 10 1/s for the best ﬁt. In plot (c) we used the
same curve as in (a) but multiplied by a factor 0.6, which can
be explained with the larger viscosity.
3
RESULTS
In order to obtain results we can compare with the
experiments ﬁrst the values of the input parameters have
to be speciﬁed. The drag coeﬃcient Γ for a single head
can be calculated from the Stokes formula yielding Γ ≈
6×10−11kg/s.
The free energy which can be gained from the ATP
hydrolysis is about 25 kTor 100×10−21J. During a
stepping cycle the two conformational changes consume
the free energy of the ATP, while the rest length of the
spring changes by 8 nm in both cases. This means
that 1/2·25kT≈(K/2)(8 nm)2, from which we get
K≈1.5 pN/nm.
A lower limit for the depth Qof the potential valleys
can be determined from the fact that the kinesin in rigor
state supports forces in excess of 10 pN. If we try to pull
out the two-headed kinesin molecule (with drag coeﬃ-
cient 2Γ) from a 2 Qdeep potential valley with a force F,
a low limit for the escape rate is
F2
kT2Γe−2Q/kT
as follows from a more general expression (2) to be dis-
cussed later. Assuming that the escape rate is much
larger than 10−21/s we get 13 kTas a lower limit of
Q. In reality the two heads cannot be handled as one
larger head, because they are not ﬁxed to each other too
rigidly, therefore, this is a very low limit. Q≈20kTis
expected to be a better estimate.
Notethatthetemperature Tplaysanimportantrolein
our model due to the deep potential valley the Brownian
kinesin heads have to escape from.
We can assume that at the beginning of a stepping
cycle both heads are sitting in the same valley of the
potential. After the ATP hydrolysis, as the ﬁrst confor-
mational change, the strained spring is trying to stretch,
pushing one of the heads to a neighboring valley, which
isL= 8 nm away. If the load force is small there is a
large probability p+
0L=J+
0L/(J+
0L+J−
0L) that the front
head jumps to the forward direction due to the asymme-
try ofthe potential valleys(the forwardslope is less steep
than the backward), and there is only a small probability
p−
0L=J−
0L/(J+
0L+J−
0L) that the other head jumps back-
ward.J+
0LandJ−
0Ldenote the corresponding jumping
rates. Increasing the load the probability of the forward
step decreases while that of the backward step increases.
The average time t0L= 1/(J+
0L+J−
0L) which is needed
for this stretching also slightly increases. Completing
this subprocessthe secondconformationalchangeoccurs:
the spring is trying to contract. Now for low load force
the probability p+
L0=J+
L0/(J+
L0+J−
L0) that the back-
ward head jumps forward to the next valley, where the
other head is sitting, is close to 1, while the probabil-
ityp−
L0=J−
L0/(J+
L0+J−
L0) that the forward head jumps
backward is very small. Increasing the load the situation
is similar to the previous case.Thus, under low load force the kinesin molecule steps
8nm forwardduringalmosteachmechanochemicalcycle.
But increasing the load the probability that the molecule
remainsonthe same placeoreventakesa backward8 nm
step increases. Reaching the stall load the average dis-
placement of the kinesin becomes zero.
Since the potential valleys are very deep (compared
to the thermal energy kT), the heads spend almost all
of their time at the bottom, and they are able to jump
only very seldom. Therefore, we can calculate the above
mentioned jumping rates ( J=J+
0L,J−
0L,J+
L0orJ−
L0)
from an Arrhenius-like formula. All we need for this
is the eﬀective potential Veﬀ(x) for the jumping head
at the bottom of the valley and at the top of the bar-
rier. The eﬀective potential consists of ﬁve parts: the
V(x) periodic potential for the jumping head; the poten-
tialFload
jxof the external load force; the spring poten-
tial/angbracketleftbig
(K/2)(x−xr−l(t))2/angbracketrightbig
xr; the/angbracketleftbig
V(xr)/angbracketrightbig
xrpotential
for the remaining head; and the potential/angbracketleftbig
Fload
rxr/angbracketrightbig
xrof the external load force for the remaining head. In
this approximation/angbracketleftbig
.../angbracketrightbig
xrmeans thermal averaging for
the position xrof the remaining head at the bottom of
its valley. Thus, from the corresponding Fokker-Planck
equation the jumping rate is
J=D·e−(Veff
max−Veff
min)/kT
/integraltext
e−(Veff(x)−Veff
min)/kTdx·/integraltext
e−(Veff
max−Veff(x))/kTdx,
(2)
whereD=kT/Γ denotes the diﬀusion coeﬃcient; Veﬀ
min
andVeﬀ
maxare the minimal and the maximal values of the
eﬀective potential; and the integrals should be evaluated
around the appropriate extremum. Due to the depth of
the potential valleys if we do not average the position of
the remaining head but assume that it always sits at the
bottom, we get similar results.
From the jumping rates one can calculate the aver-
age displacement d= (p+
0Lp+
L0−p−
0Lp−
L0)L= (J+
0LJ+
L0−
J−
0LJ−
L0)[1/(J+
0L+J−
0L)][1/(J+
L0+J−
L0)]Lduring a cycle
and the average time t=t0L+tL0= 1/(J+
0L+J−
0L) +
1/(J+
L0+J−
L0) needed for this. Increasing the load the av-
erage displacement decreases due to the increasing prob-
abilities ofthe remaining and the backwardslippage; and
the average time slightly increases as a manifestation of
the so-called Fenn eﬀect [26]. (At stall load it is about
three times larger than without load.)
AtsaturatingATPconcentrationtheonlyrate-limiting
factor is the stepping process, therefore dividing the av-
erage displacement by the average time gives the average
velocityv=d/tof the kinesin (Fig. 3a and c).
But at low ATP concentration the rate-limiting factor
is the diﬀusion of the ATP to the kinesin heads, i.e.,
the stepping process is much faster than getting an ATP.
Thus the average velocity is proportional to the average
displacement during one cycle with the prefactor
ν(cATP) =νsat·cATP
Km+cATP≈νsat
Km·cATP≈const·cATP,
4
which is the rate of the ATP consumption. cATPde-
notes here the ATP concentration; νsatis the inverse
average time of a cycle; and Kmis the mechanochem-
ical Michaelis-Menten constant. Thus the velocity of the
kinesin is v=ν(cATP)d(Fig. 3b).
The diﬀerence between the shapes of the force-velocity
curves at saturating (Fig. 3a and c) and at low (Fig. 3b)
ATPconcentrationshowsunambiguouslytheFenneﬀect.
Changing the distribution of the load force Fbetween
the heads causes the change of the average time ( t0Land
tL0) needed for the two subprocesses, but their sum, i.e.,
theaverageduration tofthe steppingcycle, andthe aver-
age displacement dremains practically unchanged. Thus
the force-velocity curves are essentially the same for any
distribution of the load force.
We have also solved the Langevin equations (1) by nu-
mericalintegration and our values are in full agreement
with the results obtained from the above analysis.
DISCUSSION
Our model describes the stepping process of the ki-
nesin molecule with elastically coupled heads. We do
not use reaction rate constants, but only strain induced
conformational changes and the underlying asymmetric
periodic potential. Therefore, we can give the full de-
scription of the dynamics of the motion.
From Eq. (7) of Ref. [11] it follows that the displace-
ment variance of a “Two-Step” process (in which each
cycle consists of two sequential subprocesses with com-
parable limiting rates) is r= 1−ps/2 times smaller than
that of a single Poisson stepping process taking the same
overall time. The stepping probability ps≤1 denotes
the probability that a cycle produces a forward step. In
our model at low load force the stepping probability is
ps=p+
0Lp+
L0≈0.8, in addition, if the ATP concentra-
tion is saturated the two subprocesses are the only rate-
limitingfactorswiththesamerates. Thisleadsto r≈0.6
as compared to r≈0.52 given with an error in the range
of 0.1−0.2 in Ref. [11]. Thus, our model explains the
low displacement variance at saturating ATP and at low
load force. Furthermore, ﬁts the measured force-velocity
curvesextremely well, and is consistent with the recent
experimental studies of the pathway of the kinesin AT-
Pase. The parameters of the model are essentially deter-
mined by experiments or theoretical calculations, there-
fore, they can only be tuned in a rather restricted range.
The shapes of the force-velocity curves are essentially in-
sensitive to the parameters within this range, showing
the robustness of the model.
If the relative position of the hinge to the backward
head is ﬁxed as, e.g., in Fig. 2b then only one power
stroke occurs during one cycle. The main advantage of
this version is that the hinge advances the whole 8 nm
distance at once. (Note, that in this case the ﬁrst sub-
process is not so important, thus it can be of a diﬀerenttype, for example, similar to the myosin step: detach-
ment, free swinging, and rebinding to the next side.) In
any other cases (like in Fig. 2a), the two subprocesses
meantwopowerstrokes,andthehingeadvancesthe8nm
in two parts. In spite of this, one may observe only 8 nm
displacements, as the two power strokes occur in rapid
succession.
From Eq. (2) it follows that the depth and the degree
of asymmetry of the valleys in the periodic potential we
assumed have the strongest eﬀects on the results. On the
other hand, some further details (such as, for example,
a shallow secondary valley instead of the ﬂat part) have
lesssigniﬁcantinﬂuenceonthe force-velocitycurves. The
temperature plays an essential role in the actual mech-
anism of the walk. The two major points where tem-
perature comes into the picture are the following: i) the
potential valley has to be considerably deeper than 3 kT
to ensure proper binding, ii) on the other hand, from a
deep valley the heads may escape only if the spring and
the temperature act simultaneously since the energy of
the spring cannot be larger than that of the ATP hydrol-
ysis.
Todecidewhichtheoreticalmodeldescribesthekinesin
stepping process in the best way, further experimental
studies are needed. One possibility is to see how the
force-velocity curves continue both at higher forces than
the stall force and at negative forces. Another possibility
is to measure the displacement variance at higher loads
and at lower ATP concentrations. This could distinguish
among the diﬀerent cases of our model as well, because
for diﬀerent distributions of the load force Fthe average
duration of the subprocesses are also diﬀerent resulting
in diﬀerent variances.
We are aware that C. Doering, M. Magnasco and G.
Oster have considered a similar approach to the problem
of the kinesin walk [27].
The authors are grateful to J. Prost and A. Ajdari for
useful discussions and for their kind hospitality during
the visit of I. D. at ESPCI in Paris. The present research
was supported by the Hungarian Research Foundation
GrantNo.T4439andNo.F17246,andthecontractERB-
CHRX-CT92-0063.
[1] See,e.g., Darnell, J., Lodish, H. & Baltimore, D. (1990)
Molecular Cell Biology (Scientiﬁc American Books, New
York)
[2] Song, Y.-H. & Mandelkow, E. (1993) Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA 90, 1671-1675.
[3] Hoenger, A., Sablin, E.P., Vale, R.D., Fletterick, R.J. &
Milligan, R.A. (1995) Nature376, 271-274.
[4] Kikkawa, M., Ishikawa, T., Wakabayashi, T. &Hirokawa,
N. (1995) Nature376, 274-277.
[5] Hirose, K., Lockhart, A., Cross, R.A. & Amos, L.A.
(1995)Nature376, 277-279.
[6] Vale, R.D., Reese T.S. & Sheetz M.P. (1985) Cell42,
39-50.
5
[7] Ray, S., Meyhoefer, E., Milligan, R.A. & Howard, J.
(1993)J. Cell. Biol. 121, 1083-1093.
[8] Hunt, A.J., Gittes, F. & Howard, J. (1994) Biophys J.
67, 766-781.
[9] Svoboda, K. & Block, S.M. (1994) Cell77, 773-784.
[10] Svoboda, K., Schmidt,C.F., Schnapp,B.J. &Block, S.M.
(1993)Nature365, 721-727.
[11] Svoboda, K., Mitra, P.P. & Block, S.M. (1994) Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 91, 11782-11786.
[12] Block, S.M. & Svoboda, K. (1995) Biophys J. 68, 230-
241.
[13] Magnasco, M.O. (1993) Phys. Rev. Lett. 71, 1477-1480.
[14] Ajdari, A. & Prost, J. (1992) C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris 315,
1635-1639.
[15] Prost, J., Chauwin, J.-F., Peliti, L. & Ajdari, A. (1994 )
Phys. Rev. Lett. 72, 2652-2655.
[16] Astumian, R.D. & Bier, M. (1994) Phys. Rev. Lett. 72,
1766-1769.
[17] Doering, C.R., Horsthemke, W. & Riordan, J. (1994)
Phys. Rev. Lett. 72, 2984-2987.
[18] Millonas, M.M. & Dykman, D.I. (1994) Phys. Lett. A
185, 65-69.
[19] Millonas, M.M. (1995) Phys. Rev. Lett. 74, 10-13.
[20] Bartussek, R., H¨ anggi, P. & Kissner, J.G. (1994) Euro-
phys. Lett. 28, 459-464.
[21] Ajdari, A. (1994) J. Phys. I France 4, 1577-1582.
[22] Peskin, C.S. & Oster, G. (1995) Biophys J. 68, 202-211.
[23] Rayment, I., Holden, H.M., Whittaker, M., Yohn, C.B.,
Lorenz, M., Holmes, K.C. & Milligan, R.A. (1993) Sci-
ence261, 58-65.
[24] Ostap, E.M. & Thomas, D.D. (1995) Biophys J. 68, 335.
[25] Gilbert, S.P., Webb, M.R., Brune, M. & Johnson, K.A.
(1995)Nature373, 671-676.
[26] Fenn, W.O. (1924) J. Physiol. 184, 373-395.
[27] C. Doering, private communication
6
