arXiv:cond-mat/9809338v1  [cond-mat.stat-mech]  24 Sep 1998Immunization and Aging: a Learning Process in the Immune Net work
Rita Maria Zorzenon dos Santos
Instituto de F´ ısica - Universidade Federal Fluminense, Av . Litorˆ anea, s/n - Boa Viagem, 24210-340, Niter´ oi-RJ, Bra zil
Am´ erico T. Bernardes
Departamento de F´ ısica, Universidade Federal de Ouro Pret o, Campus do Morro do Cruzeiro, 35400-000, Ouro Preto-MG,
Brazil
(March 6, 2018)
The immune system can be thought as a complex network of diﬀer ent interacting elements. A
cellular automaton, deﬁnedinshape-space, wasrecentlysh owntoexhibitself-regulation andcomplex
behavior and is, therefore, a good candidate to model the imm une system. Using this model to
simulate a real immune system we ﬁnd good agreement with rece nt experiments on mice. The
model exhibitstheexperimentallyobservedrefractory beh avioroftheimmunesystemundermultiple
antigen presentations as well as loss of its plasticity caus ed by aging.
PACS: 02.70Lq,05.45+b,87.10+e,87.22
The special capability of the immune system is pat-
tern recognition and its assignment is to patrol the body
and guard its identity. The main cells responsible for the
immune response against any attack by antigens (virus,
poison, etc.) are the white blood cells called lympho-
cytes. Each lymphocyte carries on its surface the order
of105molecularreceptorsandthe immune systemis able
to produce the order of 1011diﬀerent types of molecular
receptors. Oneofthe mainclassesoflymphocytesarethe
Bcellswhichproduceantibodieswiththesamemolecular
shape as those of its molecular receptors. Each molecu-
lar receptor (or antibody) is able to recognize and to be
recognized. This immune recognition can lead either to a
positive response, which generates cell proliferation, cell
activation and antibody secretion, or to a negative one
that results in tolerance or suppression.
In1974NielsKayJerne1proposedatheorywhichcom-
pares the immune system to a self-regulated multicon-
nected functional network. This functionally connected
network, generated by the (lock-key) interactions among
the elements of the immune system, is self-regulated by
the dynamics of activation and suppression; some pop-
ulations decay and new ones grow, but there is no per-
colation of the information through the entire immune
system. The immune memory may be a consequence
of network interactions. Some experiments2,3suggest
that only20%ofthe lymphocytesareconnected, whereas
their majority are small resting cells, able to respond to
any antigen.
We have simulated recently4a modiﬁed version5of
a cellular automaton model proposed by Stauﬀer and
Weisbuch6, which, in turn, was based on one introduced
by De Boer, Segel and Perelson7. Although the previ-
ous studies have shown that this model can exhibit sta-
ble and chaotic behaviors, none of them are interesting
from the immunological point of view. Our simulations
have demonstrated that in the transition region, between
those behaviors, we obtain a multiconnected functionalnetwork whose emergent properties reproduces many of
the properties of the temporal evolution of the immune
repertoire4.
The elements of the automaton are associated with
points in shape-space8. Each point on a d-dimensional
space corresponds to the shape of a molecule (associ-
ated with a B cell receptor or antibody). Every one of
thedcoordinates describes one of many factors involved
in the immune pattern recognition, such as geometrical
shape, electric charge, hydrophobicity etc. To each site
iwe associate an automaton of three states, represent-
ing the population (concentration) of the corresponding
receptor: low - or non-activated ( Bi= 0), intermediate
(Bi= 1) and high - or excited ( Bi= 2). Site iin-
teracts with 2 d+ 1 sites: its mirror image −iand the
nearest neighbors of the mirror image (representing im-
perfect lock-key interactions). For each site we deﬁne a
ﬁeldhithat represents the concentrations of complemen-
tary receptors,
hi=/summationdisplay
j(i)Bj(i) (1)
where the sum runs over the 2 d+1 sites j(i) that inﬂu-
encethesite i. Theupdateruleoftheautomatonisbased
on a dose response function which describes the receptor
crosslinking involved in B cell activation5–7. There is
a minimal dose ( θ1) of antigen/or antibody excitation
that elicits the speciﬁc response, but for a high dose of
excitation (greater than θ2) the response decreases (sup-
pression). The rule is
Bi(t+1) =/braceleftbigg
Bi(t)+1 if θ1≤hi(t)≤θ2
Bi(t)−1 otherwise(2)
but no change is made if it would lead to Bi=−1 or
Bi= 3.
This model exhibits a transition from stable to chaotic
regimes for d≥25, depending on the activation thresh-
old (θ1) and the width of the activation interval of the
1
window ( θ2−θ1). In the stable region the system always
evolves to ﬁxed points or short limit cycles, with very
low percentage of activated sites, whereas in the chaotic
region most sites are excited, corresponding to a non-
healthy state. None of these behaviors corresponds to
the dynamical picture of the functional connected net-
work suggested by Jerne. In the transition region (whose
location depends on d5) we did observe, however, emer-
gent complex behavior which is appropriate to describe
a self-regulated multiconnected network4. We have also
shown that memory comes from the dynamics of the sys-
tem and can be described as the ability of the system to
adapt to changes provoked by excitations (antigen pre-
sentations).
We use this model to simulate the main features ob-
served in some recent experiments concerning immuniza-
tion and the eﬀects of aging on the immune response of
mice9–11. Since until now there is only limited evidence
supportingtheexistenceoftheimmunenetwork2,3butno
conclusive proof, our simulations may provide the much
needed connections between the available experimental
results and the Jerne theory.
Verdolin9subjected young (8 weeks old) mice to a ﬁrst
immunization, and 14 days afterwards to 9 consecutive
immunizations with intervals of one week between them.
The speciﬁc antibodies are measured 7 days after each
antigen presentation. The protocol used for immuniza-
tion consist of intraperitoneal injection (boosters) of a
speciﬁc antigen (OVA). Verdolin’s results (for a group
of 6 mice) show (see Fig 1) the speciﬁc antibody counts
as a function of the presentation with all doses counted
relative to the ﬁrst immunization response. The results
show a fast increase from the ﬁrst to the fourth presenta-
tion with a consecutive saturation of the response. This
is interpreted from the immunological point of view as a
refractory behavior of the immune system, meaning that
after few presentations there is a saturation of the level
of antibody counts, a fact that can not be explained only
by clonal selection theory for the immune system.
The second experiment we discuss in this paper con-
cerns the eﬀects of aging on the immune responsiveness.
According to the results obtained by Lahmann et al.10
and, later, by Faria et al.11for young (8 weeks) and
old (25 weeks) mice, after the ﬁrst immunization the re-
sponse of the young mice achieves much higher levels (in
the antibody counts) than the response generated by the
old ones, indicating some rigidity of the system, acquired
during the aging process. In other words, there is a loss
of responsiveness (see the insert of Fig 1).
We set out to test whether the model (1-2) is able to
reproduce the experimental ﬁndings, of saturation and
aging described above. We used the following initial dis-
tribution for the Bvariables: (1 −x) ofB= 0, and1
2x
ofB= 1 and 2. All our simulations were performed
at the transition region for a three-dimensional lattice
withL= 50; the results are qualitatively the same as
those obtained with L= 100 and for higher dimensions4.
We chose x= 0.26 and used the activation interval ac-cording to our previous studies. In order to study the
eﬀects of a given antigen presentation we proceed as fol-
lows: a system, prepared as described above, was allowed
to evolve according to the rules (1-2); this was used as
our ”control” group. In a replica of the same initial sys-
tem the antigen presentation is simulated by introducing
”damage”12: randomly chosen regions of receptor pop-
ulations in the B= 0 state were ﬂipped to the acti-
vated state( B= 2)4. This ﬂip simulates the exposure
to antigen indirectly, by the activation or the increase of
the concentration of speciﬁc clones (receptors) that are
able to recognize this antigen. The evolution of the con-
trol system and the damaged copy was then compared
by measuring the Hamming distance between them, to
study the eﬀects of the antigen presentation. In the case
of one or two antigen presentations4the results indicate
that under perturbation the multiconnected network ex-
pands and relaxes in few time steps, following an aggre-
gation/disaggregationdynamicswhichadaptsthesystem
to the new conditions, including some sites of the dam-
aged regions in the next conﬁguration of the functional
network.
In this work we discarded in all simulations the ini-
tial 1000 Monte Carlo Steps (MCS)- a step consists of
one update of all sites. At this point( considered to be
equivalent to the ”birth”of the immune system) we start
to produce at random antigen presentations of diﬀerent
types and sizes, with diﬀerent, randomly chosen time in-
tervals between them. This introduced noise simulates a
real immune system exposed to many antigens, present
in the environment in which the system lives and is in-
gested in food, etc. We adopted the arbitrary time scale
of 5 MCS corresponding to one day. The noise discussed
above was generated by small damages produced at ran-
dom: the time interval between two consecutive anti-
gen presentations can vary from 1 to 100 MCS (1 −20
days); each antigen presentation can correspond to 1,
2 or 3 damages introduced at diﬀerent regions of non-
activated populations. These regions may have diﬀerent
sizes, varying from 1 to 3 (onion-like) concentric layers
(containing 7, 25 and 63 sites respectively) around a cen-
tral site. The control system and the replica that sim-
ulates the immunization process (multiple antigen pre-
sentations) were subjected to the same noise, during the
entire simulation. The immunization protocol was simu-
lated by damaging 6 layers around a speciﬁc site at ﬁxed
time intervals of one week (35 MCS), corresponding to
the peritoneal injection. This high-dose antigen presen-
tation clearly diﬀerentiates the speciﬁc antigen presen-
tation from the noise. We performed these sequences of
high dose antigen presentations starting at two diﬀerent
times, corresponding to two diﬀerent ages, 8 weeks (280
MCS) and 25 weeks (875 MCS), in order to study the
eﬀects of aging on the immune responsiveness.
In ﬁgure 2 we show the results obtained for a sequence
of antigen presentations. For each case (diﬀerent age)
our results are averagedover 10 statistically independent
samples corresponding to 10 randomly uncorrelated ini-
2
tial conﬁgurations (and diﬀerent noise).
The speciﬁc antibodies counts in the experiments are
compared in our simulations to the number of diﬀerent
excited populations involved in the response, which is
measured by the time evolution of the total Hamming
distance between the “control” and the excited replica.
We obtained the same qualitative behavior as the real
immune systems shown in ﬁgure 1. After few presenta-
tions the responsessaturate, showingthe samerefractory
behavior as seen in the experiments. Since in the experi-
ments the speciﬁc response wasmeasured (corresponding
to the antigen that was used), we have also considered,
in our simulations, the speciﬁc response. To this end
we measured the changes on the clones belonging to the
damaged region (DR) and its mirror image (M). Satura-
tion is seen alsoin these regions, as shownin Fig 3, which
presents the speciﬁc changes in DR, M and the total HD
for a single sample (the same behavior was observed in
all samples).
The learning process that may occur in the immune
network, due to the antigen introduction, results in local
changes of the activated clones conﬁgurations, and mem-
ory is due to the attainment of a new steady state after
the antigen challenge disappears. The learning process
that may occur due to multiple antigen presentations,
leads to the saturation behavior: after a few antigen pre-
sentationsthesystemlearnshowtocontroltheexcitation
provoked by this antigen and does not need to improve
the response anymore. This interpretation is supported
by other studies performed for high-dose antigen presen-
tations without noise, that will be published elsewhere.
By observing the evolution of the excited sites in the
DR and M regions, we saw that after each presentation
more sites are included in the functional network. After
that, the response will stay the same. The multiple anti-
gen presentation, lead to the saturation of the number of
new sites incorporated in those regionsand after that the
system will always give the same response to this kind of
antigen. The aggregation/disaggregationprocesses guar-
antee that the subsequent conﬁgurations of the network,
arrived at after each antigen presentation, include the
necessary information about the damage introduced, but
still keep only 10 −20% of the sites excited, in agreement
with the experimental results.
This conclusion is also reinforced by the observation
that, the level of saturation and also the time necessary
for the system achieve the saturated state will depend on
the size and number of damages which simulate the anti-
gen presentation. We have performed the same kind of
simulation (immunization procedures) for diﬀerent sizes
of the damages; for small damages (4 layers) the system
saturatesfasterthanforbigones(6layers),sinceitlearns
faster about the small damaged regions.
The data shown in the insert of ﬁgure 2 corresponds to
the saturation values of the Hamming distance diﬀerence
between “control” and replica as measured for the two
diﬀerent ages (8 and 25 weeks). From those results we
conclude that the “older” the system is, the more rapidlyit saturates and the less intense is its response. The older
system has been exposed to a larger number of diﬀerent
antigens, thus more regions have already been excited,
more information has been added to the functional net-
work and the system is more rigid to accept new local
changes. Old systems saturate faster than young ones,
since less changes are accepted in their dynamics. The
rigidity of the system, which increases with age, can be
interpreted from the network point of view as a loss of
its plasticity. The younger the system the greater its
plasticity.
In this work we have shown that the multiconnected
functional network obtained in the critical region of a
simple cellular automaton model can describe the behav-
ior of a real immune system. The emergent properties of
the cooperative behavior found in our simulations are in
good agreement with the experimental results exhibited
by mice in experiments of immunization and aging. Our
results indicate that the Jerne theory as implemented
in this model could explain these experimental observa-
tions and possibly provide the much needed connection
between this theory and the available experiments. The
immunization process and the saturation (refractory be-
havior) observed in the antibody counts are interpreted
within the network point of view as the learning process
of the immune system and the aging eﬀects are inter-
preted as the loss of ability to produce new local changes
or the loss of plasticity. This work also give support to
many conjectures which suggest that the emergent prop-
erties exhibited by complex automata, resulting from a
dynamical behavior involving adaptive mechanisms are
very appropriated to describe biological systems. The
use of cellular automata to model the immune responses
has been reviewed recently by one of us13.
Acknowledgements : We thank Nelson Vaz and his
group for the enlightening discussions. In special we
acknowledge the permission to reproduce data from
reference11and B. Verdolin for supplying the experimen-
tal data shown in ﬁgure 1. We also thank Luiz Andrade
for helpful discussions. ATB acknowledges the kind hos-
pitality ofDF-UFMG. This workwaspartiallysupported
by the Brazilian Agencies CNPq, CAPES, FINEP and
FAPEMIG.
1Jerne, N.K., Ann. Immuno. (Inst. Pasteur) 125 C,373-389
(1974).
2Coutinho, A., Immunol. Rev. 110, 63-87 (1989).
3Holmberg, D., Anderson, ˚A, Carlsson, L. & Forsgren, S.,
Immunol. Rev. 110, 84-103 (1989).
4Bernardes, A.T. and Zorzenon dos Santos, R.M. J. Theor.
Biol.186173 (1997).
5Zorzenon dos Santos, R.M and Bernardes, A.T., Physica A
219, 1-12 (1995).
3
6Stauﬀer, D. and Weisbuch, G., Physica A 180, 42-52
(1992).
7De Boer, R.J., Segel, L.A. and Perelson, A.S., J. Theor.
Biol.155, 295-333 (1992).
8Perelson, A.S. andOster, G. F., J. Theor. Biol. 81, 645-670
(1979).
9Verdolin, B., MSc. Thesis, Departamento de Bioqu´ ımica e
Imunologia, Instituto de Ciˆ encias Biol´ ogicas, UFMG, Bel o
Horizonte (1997).
10Lahmann, W.M, Menezes, J.S., Verdolin, B.A. and Vaz,
N.M.,Braz. J. Med. Biol. Res. 25813-821 (1992).
11Faria, A.M.C., Ficker, S.M., Spezialli, E., Menezes, J.S.,
Stransky, B., Rodrigues, V.S. and Vaz, N.M.,submitted to
Immunology (1997).
12Jan, N. and de Arcangelis,L., Annual Reviews of Computa-
tional Physics I, ed. by D. Stauﬀer,World Scientiﬁc, 1-16
(1994).
13Zorzenon dos Santos, R.M., to appear in Annual Reviews
of Computational Physics VI, ed. by D. Stauﬀer, World
Scientiﬁc (1998).
Figure Captions:
Figure 1: The speciﬁc antibody counts as a function of
the 9 antigen (OVA) presentations (boosters) for a group
of 6 young mice (8 weeks old) with one week of inter-
val between them. All data are normalized by the ﬁrst
response9. In the insert we show the eﬀects of aging in
the speciﬁc antibody counts as a function of the antigen
presentation for young (8 weeks old) and old (25 weeks
old) mice11.
Figure 2: The time evolution of the diﬀerence between
the Hamming distances of “control” group and replica
group which was subjected to a sequence of antigens pre-
sentation with one week of interval between them. The
simulations were performed for two diﬀerent ages: (cir-
cle) starting at t= 280 (8weeks) and (square) at t= 875
(25 weeks). In the insert we show the mean saturation
values for the Hamming distance diﬀerences for the two
ages considered.
Figure 3: The evolution of the Hamming distance dif-
ference between“control”and replica, for onesample, for
the damaged region (DR), the mirror image of the dam-
ages region (M) and the overall changes on the lattice
(HD). This simulation corresponds to the immunization
processperformedina25weeksoldsystem, byproducing
a damage of 6 concentric layers (377 sites). The M re-
gion corresponds to images and nearest-neighbors of the
damaged region.
4
1 3 5 7 9
boosters0100020003000ELISA (mean diff)
8w 25w02000400060008000ELISA
200 600 1000 1400 1800
time (MCS)020040060080010001200mean diff (HD)t0=280
t0=875
280 875800900100011001200
800 1200 1600
time050010001500HD800 1200 16000200400B=2 sites (DR)800 1200 16000200400B=2 sites (M)
